# How did the Roman empire function at its peak? How did it govern its vast empire including many different groups of people?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2014-11-07
	views: 1134
	upvotes: 12
	quora url: /How-did-the-Roman-empire-function-at-its-peak-How-did-it-govern-its-vast-empire-including-many-different-groups-of-people/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


The empire wasn't really a state in the modern sense at all, at least not until very late. "An Efficient Bureaucracy" is a very misleading description.

Under the Republic and the early emperors, what we call the "Empire" was a network of client relationships, both between states and between individuals. Rome dealt with cities, kingdoms and tribes, not with individuals unless those individuals were some kind of threat to Rome - or if they were unlucky enough to attract the attention of a Roman with enough political power to put the squeeze on them. In most cases Roman 
'rule' consisted of making sure that lesser polities did not create disturbances that required intervention from Rome and paid taxes. 

The functional unit of the Empire was really the ancient city-state (or in some places, a conquered tribe or kingdom) stripped of the freedom to pursue a foreign policy but generally making its own laws, speaking its own language, and run by local elites. This was a very efficient way to run an empire, since it didn't require a lot of Roman input at all - for the vast majority of subjects, Rome was a pretty distant presence. The main exception was Egypt, which was almost a private plantation owned personally by the Emperor in the early days - Egypt was critical for the grain supply that fed Rome, so the emperors administered it directly and very carefully to keep the vital food supplies coming. 

Modern ideological preoccupations - like indoctrinating people in political ideals, or forcing them to give up their language, or changing their tastes in clothing - were never really part of the Roman project. Romans did send colonists out - usually retired soldiers - to create new cities which would act as strategic watch points over conquered areas, and incidentally to spread Latin language and Roman culture. The various conquered people did pick up Roman culture eventually (at least in the west) but this had more to do with social climbing by the provincials than with imperial policy from the center. It was all very "multicultural". The best evidence of the fact is that the biggest language in the Roman empire was Greek, not Latin.

As for governance until things started going bad in the later 3rd century there was surprisingly little. Taxation was a mix of something like tribute levied by a city, a kingdom or tribe), tolls, and limited direct taxation. However in most cases the tax collection was done by private contractors (_publicani)_  who paid a lump sum to Rome up and then collected the actual taxes - plus interest - from cities, tribes, kings, or individuals. It was a system that involved a lot of corruption and generated a lot of resentment, although it didn't become really burdensome until the cost of defending the borders in the 3rd and 4th centuries gradually undermined the whole economy of the Roman world. 

By the time of Diocletian (mid 4th C) civil wars, constant barbarian conflicts, and rare but expensive wars with Parthia had put an insupportable strain on the central government. Diocletian and his successors attempted to centralize administration and take control of the economy directly. While this saved the empire from external threats by keeping armies in the field, it also carried the seeds of its own destruction: high taxes, attempted price controls, and "red tape" messed up the civilian economy severely - the vibrant trade networks and (relative) social mobility of the early Empire dried up as rich people took refuge on landed estates, traded in kind to avoid taxes, and peasants increasingly turned into serfs. Cities became less important, and big landowners more so, paving the way for later feudalism. Not entirely by accident, the later Empire was also prone to rebellions and coups - local elites could and did field armies as effectively as the central government.

Trying to hold things together is what really drove the religious policy. Unlike, say, the Spanish Inquisition or the NKVD the early Empire didn't care what you 'believed' but it happily reserved the right to burn your temples -- or you -- if that was convenient for policy. Besides the repeated and very well documented persecution of Christians and the Diaspora of the Jews, Rome also suppressed the Druids, German tribal religions, Manichaeans, and any local religious leader who looked like he might be trouble. Foreign cults and practices were occasionally banned in Rome itself, but that was 'domestic' rather than 'imperial' politics. 
 
The traditional policy was, still, pretty laissez-faire overall - if you kept your head down, you were mostly ignored. As things went bad in the 3d and 4th centuries, this changed for the worse. A lot of the persecutions originated with Emperors of dubious legitimacy (there were a lot of coups and rebellions in this period) trying to shore up their positions by defending 'traditional values' against vulnerable outsiders or hoping to extort a public profession of loyalty. In the eastern Empire that pattern continued after the conversion -- first agains pagans and then against dissident Christian groups -- until the appearance of Islam had created a powerful external enemy which welded remainder of "Roman" (really "Byzantine" by that point) society into a much more coherent model, more like a modern nation-state than the old multicultural and multi-ethnic Empire.

