# Was the old Roman Empire evil?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2014-11-09
	views: 17779
	upvotes: 107
	quora url: /Was-the-old-Roman-Empire-evil/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


There's an interesting side question as to how well you can apply the concept to something so big and old as an empire that lasted more than a thousand years and stretched from Scotland to Armenia. That includes a lot of different sets of people with different aims and values. It includes adventurers like Caesar and principled administrators like Trajan; reactionary nobles like Cato and proletarian firebrands like Cinna; "good emperors" like the Antonines and dozens of usurpers, coup-leaders and thugs. 

For part of the premise: Ruthless expansionism isn't exactly the right description - there were several distinct phases in Rome's expansion. Some of it was out-and-out empire building (Caesar in Gaul, for example), some of it was almost accidental (as when the last king of Pergamon left his kingdom to the Roman Republic in his will) and some was classic 'strategic' imperialism: conquering areas that were intended to provide a stable buffer for existing possessions (pushing the frontiers to the Rhine and the Danube, for example). There were several points in Roman history where internal dynamics at home inclined the Romans to conquest - the worst example is probably the competition among ambitious generals in the last generation of the Republic. Other times however were decidedly not expansionist: cash-strapped or strategically minded emperors deliberately pulled back from conquered areas to maintain more defensible frontiers in Germany or Hadrian's abandonment of Mesopotamia. 
 
Still, I don't think there's much question that different sets of Romans behaved terribly at different times; the destruction of Carthage, for example, involved only a figleaf of strategic justification for what was mostly just a vicious combination of land-grab and revenge for distant wrongs. There were periods of pretty much gratuitous conquest The behavior of Roman officials in many subject provinces was pretty horrendous as well read up on the career of Gaius Verres in Sicily, which we know very well from Cicero). All wars created masses of slaves - standard ancient practice - but the sheer numbers that followed big wars (particularly after the second Punic war) rendered human life very cheap and incidentally undermined the livelihoods of the Roman working classes as well. 

On the plus side of the ledger, you are correct that they worked in a very different environment than we do. Violence was far more common and the 'international norms' that restrained state behavior were very weak and limited to very basic ideas like 'it's bad to openly break treaties' and 'exterminating a whole city over a trade dispute is taking things too far'. Some of the horrific violence that was common in the whole ancient world reflected both lack of resources and poor communications: the way the Romans treated the remnants of Spartacus' army - crucifying the survivors on all roads leading out of the city for leagues in every direction - was not just sadism: it was a very cold-blooded form of propaganda which was designed to spread a message through indelible images and word-of-mouth in a world without mass media.

Compared to other rivals the Romans were not particularly bad conquerors. Until very late they tended to leave local affairs in the hands of local elites as much as possible; in Greece, for example. Aemilius Paullus and Flaminius were regarded almost universally as a big improvements on the Macedonian dynasts they beat and far friendlier to 'freedom'. They rarely suppressed native cultures and religions (the main exception being the way Caesar treated the Druids or Nero treated the Jews -- in both cases, however, the distinction between 'native religion' and 'focus of military opposition' was pretty fuzzy). They recognized in principle that subject peoples had rights that should be respected -- we know about the case of Verres, for example, because he was prosecuted and convicted for his abuses. They were usually willing to cut a deal with defeated enemies - one of the reason that the destruction of Carthage stands out is that it was unusually spiteful and vicious. 

In the last analysis, I don't think the question is answerable. We know that Rome committed a lot of horrendous acts. We also know it made possible a level of peace and security which millions of people would not have had otherwise. Besides the absence of war there was the suppression of piracy and banditry which were universal before (and after) the Roman period. Rome provided a long period in which hundreds or thousands of smaller cultures could merge and grow without either being forcibly indoctrinated or locked in tribal warfare. The question of whether those goods justify the crimes which made them possible is a philosophical rather than a historical one.

