# What impact has philosophy had on the Greek language?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2014-12-26
	views: 518
	upvotes: 2
	quora url: /What-impact-has-philosophy-had-on-the-Greek-language/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


There are a lot of words that we take for granted which don't exist "naturally"; some languages have to express them in round about ways (the way English has only one word for "cousin" while Chinese has more than a dozen, for example).

Ancient Greek, somewhat like modern German, has a great facility with abstractions. It's hard to figure out the chicken-and-egg relationship between that feature of the language and the history of Greek philosophy, though it's obvious that the two are closely connected. Certainly English has picked up this ability primarily at second hand: you can see how many of our basic conceptual words - words that refer to categories, essences, and abstractions rather than to concrete objects - are either Greek transplants or Latinized versions of Greek ideas. To some degree, of course, this reflects this fact that the ideas themselves are borrowed from the classical tradition, but it also stems from the fact that pre-modern English did not have a rich abstract vocabulary of it's own to draw on. 

As a _weak_  hypothesis, I'd say that the combination of a vibrant philosophical tradition and a vibrant tradition of open-air political argument both combined to encourage Greek to include lots of abstractions. The ancient philosopher and orator had one important thing in common: they were trying to communicate complex ideas in real time, so they both had to manage their audience's attention carefully. If you're lecturing a room full of students or an amphitheater full of citizens about something complicated, you need a shorthand notation that lets you define your terms once and then re-use them: it's far easier to say something like "We must unite to protect the _autonomia_ and _eleutheria_ of all Greeks" than "We must unite to protect this characteristic political, cultural, religious and social arrangements, as well as the freedom from both outside interference and unduly coercive forms of governance, of all Greeks". 

 So philosophers and rhetors share a professional interest in defining and popularizing new terms that allow them to develop complex arguments without a slew of verbiage. Greek political and social life were both unusual in that this kind of verbal task was very public and very common: many other cultures did not feature this kind of public argumentation as a regular aspect of life. It's not surprising that the greatest importer of Greek philosophical verbiage into Latin, Cicero, was a political orator and a lawyer as well as an amateur philosopher: he knew the practical value of being able to define your terms.


You can see the same process at work in Rome, as Roman thinkers tried to assimilate the more elaborate and specific vocabulary of Greek thinking into their own language. [Cicero](http://www.iep.utm.edu/cicero/), for example, had to invent dozens of words in Latin for Greek abstractions, the most famous being _qualitas,_ our "quality", which means literally "what-ness": an attribute which distinguishes one thing from another. This was a translation of _poiotes,_  which was coined by Plato to serve the same meaning. 

So, some aspects of philosophical language became pervasive: many words we take for granted were not 'grown' but were invented or radically repurposed, and became so successful that we don't even recognize their artificiality. Examples of these invented words in English include ethics (Greek _ethikos)_ , science (Cicero's translation of Greek _gnosis_  - but the meaning of these has diverged a lot since those days!), substance (Greek _hypostasis_ ), thesis (_thesis_ ), matter (latin _materia,_ Greek _hyle)_ and nature (the 'essence' kind, not 'birds and bees') from latin _natura,_ Greek _physis._  These examples all went on to pretty broad use in antiquity and ever since.__ 

Of course, the internal dynamic of specialized vocabulary is also self limiting. Some abstractions are useful for almost anybody, but many are of interest only to specialists. Mature Greek philosophy that spawned a rich and complex vocabulary that was almost impenetrable to outsiders and had very little impact on the life and language of non-philosophers. Subtle distinctions and extremely precise shades of meaning are important to a few, but function as a social barrier to many who lack the training to correctly use them. Unsurprisingly, the subtleties of the philosophers were often regarded as a joke in antiquity: from the way Aristophanes lampoons Socrates in _[The Clouds](http://classics.mit.edu/Aristophanes/clouds.html)_ __ to the [Satires](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satires_(Horace)) of Horace philosophers are often presented as either humbugs or as speaking an incomprehensible jargon. [Neoplatonism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neoplatonism) was especially guilty of sounding like a completely different language -- philosophy from the 4th and later centuries tends to get glossed over in modern historical treatments in part because of the vocabulary is so impenetrable. Even though many basic philosophical concepts entered the language of regular life in antiquity, there were many which failed to catch on.

