# Where do I start reading history if I want to know about dynasties, rulers, kings and kingdoms?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2014-12-28
	views: 1370
	upvotes: 7
	quora url: /Where-do-I-start-reading-history-if-I-want-to-know-about-dynasties-rulers-kings-and-kingdoms/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


I'd actually avoid the laundry-list approach. It's the thing that turns most people off of history.

For one thing, it's very hard to appreciate what's really going on if you run through history as a series of names and dates: most people's memory is structured on narratives, not on lists or catalogs, and so you'll struggle to retain information if you just hoover it up in chronological order. History is the best entertainment in the world - going at it names and dates fashion is like learning about movies by reading lists of Oscar winners instead of actually watching films.

That said, a sense of how things happen over time is still important, especially if you are covering a big time span where things change a lot. If you want to get a good grasp of history over time. Just studying themes and topics makes it very hard to form judgements on your own, because you don't get any sense of how different elements synchronize: you'd have a hard time understanding the economy of the Italian Renaissance without a sense of how, say, France was becoming increasingly centralized (providing a big, unified market) and powerful or how the Byzantine empire was coming apart (opening up trading opportunities to the East). I'd keep the topics-and-themes for later, when you've got some background knowledge to work with.

When I try to learn a new subject, I do it in two stages, much like I'd do in a new place: first _get the lay of the land_  with important, memorable landmarks, and only then _go back and try to see how it fits together_  as a system. I think this approach is particularly important in the age of the internet: it's easy to get discrete chunks of information ("When was Rome founded?") but getting a feeling for how these chunks fit together is where all the work comes in - and where the real value is found as well.

This probably means you should find some narrative histories first: you're letting somebody else give you big themes and long story arcs to learn. It could be traditional narrative histories of the _Story of Country X_  variety, or (if you are really into dynastic and family history) biographies of key figures can help a lot, since they are are naturally dramatic and tend to be more memorable. When I learn about a new subject I tend to do a mix of both. 

Don't obsess over names and dates while you're going along, at least not until you have a good grasp of the big themes in the country, culture, or dynasty you're trying to learn. It will probably take several books to get a basic feel for whats important and whats not (several books is best in any case, because you want to see the subject from multiple perspectives). It does no good to memorize "1066: Norman conquest of England" if you don't have a feel for things like _Normans = feudalized former vikings, England = south-east corner of Britain, conquered by Germanic invaders after fall of Rome,_ and _North-west Europe in 1066 is a very chaotic place._ The actual dates matter less than the bigger story arcs; if you knew those facts and somebody accidentally said "1266" instead of "1066" you'd spot the mistake because the later 13th century was not one where Viking-style freebooting was happening. If you know that, 1066 vs 1056 is a matter of detail -- detail you can always look up if it becomes an issue. In the age of the internet _memory_  is a commodity, but _insight_  is precious.

In any case, if you do use multiple sources you'll get the best hints as to what's really important and worth committing to memory. People and events and ideas that show up in many different accounts and contexts are your landmarks. Other data can be very interesting, but only a few things become symbols of or turning points in the story of a nation or culture. And you'll have a far easier time remembering details like dates and names if you see them more than context than if you frantically make notes in just one book (_"Oh yeah, Harald Godwinson, he's that guy who...."_ ).

Once you have a general idea the landmarks, you can start trying to see how the pieces fit together. You can go back and follow different threads through it: the history of a particular family over a long period, or the fortunes of an individual city, the evolution of a particular institution or a detailed reading of an original source. Hopefully you've got enough general knowledge from the first phase to see how smaller things fit into bigger trends: So the Norman conquest of England is part of the larger pattern of Norman conquests in Sicily, Southern Italy, Greece and the Middle East, or how the Normans brought the more elaborate continental version of feudalism to England in place of the simpler Saxon version. In turn the small stuff puts life into the big themes; it's easy to read "Norman feudalism displace Saxon thegnage" but if you read a detailed account of the life of a Saxon thegn and another of the life of a Norman count, you'll really feel the differences instead of just having them jotted down in shorthand.

Personally I wait until I've enough "phase 2" reading before I move on to topic-based treatments like _The Role of Women in Anglo-Saxon Politics_  or _Nordic versus Continental models of Kingship._ Topic based stuff tends to assume a high degree of specialist knowledge (most of it is written by and for professional academics) so it's hard to follow if only have a shaky grasp of the bigger picture. 

There are plenty of specialized resources if you really need strict chronological sequences, dynasty lists and so on. The word "chronology" is usually enough to get you the data in an internet search, for example [Anglo-Saxon Chronology](https://www.google.com/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=Anglo+saxon+chronology&spell=1) or [Mesopotamian Chronology](https://www.google.com/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=mesopotamian+chronology). These are handy for research, or knowing where to look ("Who was king of France when the Normans landed in England?") but not a great place to start learning.

