# How did ancient historians and writers (Herodotus or Josephus, e.g.) support themselves financially? Did they have wealthy patrons like Renaissance writers and artists did?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2018-02-16
	views: 3157
	upvotes: 105
	quora url: /How-did-ancient-historians-and-writers-Herodotus-or-Josephus-e-g-support-themselves-financially-Did-they-have-wealthy-patrons-like-Renaissance-writers-and-artists-did/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


History — like literature in general — was not a “profession” in the sense of a job undertaken for money in the way we understand it. There was not a literary marketplace — in the absence of mechanical reproduction, it was basically impossible to make a living by selling your work. Thus, almost all ancient historians were members of gentry; not necessarily _powerful_ aristocrats, but men (almost always men) with assured incomes who did not need to work with their hands. Cases of writers making their way entirely on the strength of their literary skills, even with the help of patrons, are quite rare.

History-writing was particularly attractive, because it straddled the line between pure literature and the proper concerns of an aristocrat: politics and war. Thus, writing history was a respectable way for someone who lacked the money, charisma, or ambition for a career in politics to still live up to the ideals of his class. A perfect example is the Roman historian [Livy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Livy), a member of the prosperous provincial gentry who was too timid for a career in politics and who instead devoted himself to a life of retirement and writing on his estates.

There were also aristocratic politicians and generals who had a literary bent. More than a few famous names wrote their own histories — there’s no better way to ensure your legacy than to write the histories yourself. Glory was an important part of the aristocratic code — and, for many aristocrats whose political career was less than successful, self-justification was also critical. The most famous example by far is Julius Caesar, but among the other notables who left autobiographical accounts of their own times were [Thucydides](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thucydides), who was far more successful on paper than the battlefield, and [Ptolemy I](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ptolemy_I_Soter), for whom the reverse is true. The Roman historian [Sallust ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sallust)wrote in part to redeem his own reputation, tarnished by a career of blatant corruption during his time as a provincial governor — a tactic which worked, since he ended up becoming famous as a moralist.

There was a subset of historians who were not exactly paid to write, but who still worked for powerful patrons. Starting with the royal courts of the Hellenistic era, there were what you might call “court historians.” These had privileged access to their subjects (who were, of course, also their employers) and wrote in a semi-official capacity. Examples in this category might be [Callisthenes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Callisthenes) and [Hieronymus of Cardia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hieronymus_of_Cardia), whose careers both illustrate the ups and downs of being close to power. Callisthenes was executed, ostensibly for plotting against Alexander — though it was widely suspected that his real crime was openly mocking Alexander’s pretensions to divinity. Hieronymus nearly shared the same fate, siding with [an unlucky faction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eumenes) in the wars that followed Alexander’s death; however he managed to attach himself to a more successful court and lived to the ripe old age of 104. In the Roman era writers like [Aulus Hirtius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aulus_Hirtius) — who ghost-wrote parts of Caesar’s commentaries on the Gaul and the civil wars — and [Suetonius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suetonius) occupied similar positions.

It’s very unlikely that most of these ‘kept’ historians were paid directly to write: few gentlemen would allow themselves to be seen as hirelings. On the other hand the generosity of princes was an important part of their public character — like Homeric heroes it was important for them to be seen rewarding their followers with great lavishness. A nice middle ground was a sinecure position — Hieronymus, for example, was nominally the superintendent of the asphalt beds of the Dead Sea; Suetonius was an imperial archivist and secretary. Although none of the librarians of Alexandria were primarily historiographers, they occupied a similar position as recipients of royal largesse.

One last interesting category is the prisoner-historian. [Polybius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polybius) wrote his histories as a diplomatic hostage at Rome after a short career as a field officer for the Achaean League. [Josephus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Josephus) was a Jewish prisoner of war who was kept on by the Flavian dynasty at Rome after the destruction of the Jewish state. Hieronymus spent some time in the same condition; it’s possible that Philinus of Agrigentum, who wrote a pro-Carthaginian history of the first Punic war was in the same category, since his home city was under Carthaginian control during his career.

