# If a count was the liege of a baron, then would the baron own a piece of land in the county or next to it? Would each guy have a castle? Would there be a border between the two zones? How would peasants be divided?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2017-08-12
	views: 3809
	upvotes: 53
	quora url: /If-a-count-was-the-liege-of-a-baron-then-would-the-baron-own-a-piece-of-land-in-the-county-or-next-to-it-Would-each-guy-have-a-castle-Would-there-be-a-border-between-the-two-zones-How-would-peasants-be-divided/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


it’s important to remember that those ‘feudal pyramid’ diagrams only work in a very general way. It didn’t form a neat hierarchy like a modern army or the departments of a modern company. Feudalism was ultimately about about __how to pay for things in a cash-poor environment__ , and not about governmental hierarchy.

There was a romantic ideology of loyalty and service that evolved around feudalism — but under the trappings it was basically just a way to pay the bills. Holding a fief was a fee-for-service arrangement ([the words “fee” and “fief” share the same roots](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fief)). It didn’t transfer ownership of the land as such — it transferred the _revenues_  from the land. Rather than collecting taxation directly from the peasants as cash and then redistributing that money to an underling, it was cheaper and more efficient to simply assign the revenues from a territory directly to whomever you wanted to pay; given the difficulties of transport and the lack of ready money in the earlier middle ages this was a sensible arrangement and it actually dates back all the way to the later Roman empire, which used basically the same system to support its armies when the mercantile economy decayed. The peasants were tied to their jobs on a particular plot, but they weren’t slaves who could be sold or relocated at will — what the feudal lord got was a slice of their produce, not ownership of their persons.

On paper (er, parchment), a fief was not ownership. It was revocable, and it was not automatically hereditary. Now, in practice grants often were hereditary : the best candidate was likely to be another person with the right social background and allegiances in the area, who might very well be your son (and of course, the parent probably negotiated that deal with his lord if he could). If you were a girl, though, or a son unfit for military service, you were not going to get dad’s fief and you were going to be evicted when the fief reverted to its donor.

Anyone with the money could, however, also buy non-feudal properties (the technical term is [allod or freehold)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allod) which could be bought, sold and inherited independent of feudalism. If you owned an allod you could assign it as a fief to somebody else. Ultimately much of the “feudal pyramid” idea derived from the fact that the kings were the biggest landowners and thus the ultimate originators of many chains of feudal service. However kings often cut out the middlemen - as a king you might easily give a small but meaningful fief directly to one of your advisors or as a reward for some particular service.

The other complication in the pyramid idea is that an individual could hold more than one fief. In a world where your ‘pay’ is the rents from a chunk of land the only way to get a raise is to get more land grants. There was no reason for these grants to be physically connected. Each deal was independent, though it might come with unique terms and conditions (“I’ll let you have the fief of the big sheepfold in St. Dunstan’s if you marry my third daughter” or “you can have the revenues from the October market fair, but you’ll need to get your people to build a new bridge from Newmarket to the high road”) . Over time those conditions tended to accumulate — like programming, it was often easier to cut and paste the old contract when it came time for the new one to be started — and by the late middle ages the web of obligations, limitations and special clauses was amazingly convoluted.

To make things even messier, you could even get fiefs from multiple lords, as long as you could realistically meet their conditions. The term _[liege lord](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homage_(feudal))_  is refers to the one of your many lords who got the tie-breaking rights if your obligations to different lords came into conflict. If you held fiefs from two counts who ended up fighting each other, you’d have to side with the one who was your liege. But in other ways the liege was just one of the guys you worked for. In many ways feudalism resembled subcontracting — and, like subcontracting, it created complex contracts.

What you did __not__ get from holding a fief was a subdidivision of political or judicial power; that came with appointive office. The lord of a manor had some [limited powers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manorial_court) over property rights and petty crime in the territory of the manor (a manor, though, could be as little as a single farm with a handful of tenant farmers). The important stuff — in particular the [high justice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High,_middle_and_low_justice), the right to capital punishment, was reserved to the king and his appointed officers. If someone committed a murder in your fief, for example, you’d have to hold him for trial at the next [assize](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assizes) where he’d be tried. The assizes were usually run by travelling royal judges who would make a round of different locations over the course of the year; that’s the origin of our “circuit judges” even though nowadays they don’t move around.

There would not be “borders” between fiefs. The portion of the peasantry who were tied to particular manors were not free to take up new jobs or residences without permission, but they could and did travel (for example, to take produce to market). It was [possible for a clever peasant to escape his obligations by moving to some jurisdictions](https://www.quora.com/You-are-a-highly-intelligent-and-ambitious-peasant-born-in-the-middle-ages-How-do-you-make-your-way-up-the-social-ladder) (particularly towns which had a special form of charter) and many lords did try to keep an eye on that — usually by leaning on the towns not to allow strangers to take up residence.

More detail here: [Is this how feudalism worked?](https://www.quora.com/Is-this-how-feudalism-worked)

