# What was the most epic battle/Last Stand fought by the Praetorian Guard?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2017-09-25
	views: 2581
	upvotes: 52
	quora url: /What-was-the-most-epic-battle-Last-Stand-fought-by-the-Praetorian-Guard/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


The most Praetorian thing ever wasn’t a battle: it was the time the Praetorians [sold the empire at auction](http://www.unrv.com/decline-of-empire/didius-julianus.php) (to [Didius Julianus](https://www.ancient.eu/Didius_Julianus/), in 193).

Despite their elite status the Praetorians didn’t really rack up a particularly impressive combat record: they were political soldiers, first and foremost. The guard was better paid than the regular line legions, but their post was usually in the [Castra Praetoria](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Castra_Praetoria) behind the Viminal and Esquiline hills and their real job was to keep an eye on Caesar’s enemies, not Rome’s. If the Praetorians took the field it was usually in the context of a civil war or a military coup, not a barbarian invasion or a campaign of conquest. A subsection of the guard accompanied more warlike emperors on campaign — for example, when Trajan fought the Dacians. But on the whole the guards were secret policemen first and soldiers second, if at all.

In the Republican period there was no permanent elite formation of Praetorians. Legion commanders (who in this period were usually either consuls or praetors) sometimes hand selected a security detachment for themselves out of the available troops. These provided both personal protection and a degree of military police duty, but weren’t really a separate organization with different training or equipment.

During the period of civil wars — when rival generals were also the leaders of rival political factions, and when political intrigue was very common and violent — the praetorians became an important insurance policy for generals who good reasons to fear for their own safety: the armies of the period were notoriously fickle, sometimes abandoning their commanders in the face of a good offer from the opposing side, so a corps of well-paid loyalists became critical for anyone who wanted to survive long as a faction leader.

From that beginning, the Preatorians evolved to be the kingmakers of the early empire: starting with Nero in 54 the support of the Praetorians became the critical element for any new (or would-be) emperor. The pattern climaxed in 193, when the Guard assassinated emperor [Pertinax ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pertinax)and then basically sold the empire to the highest bidder.

> … two hundred, bolder than their fellows, actually invaded the palace with drawn swords. Pertinax had no warning of their approach until they were already up on the hill; then his wife rushed in and informed him of what had happened. On learning this he behaved in a manner that one will call noble, or senseless, or whatever one pleases. For, even though he could in all probability have killed his assailants, — as he had in the night-guard and the cavalry at hand to protect him, and as there were also many people in the palace at the time, — or might at least have concealed himself and made his escape to some place or other, by closing the gates of the palace and the other intervening doors, he nevertheless adopted neither of these courses. Instead, hoping to overawe them by his appearance and to win them over by his words, he went to meet the approaching band, which was already inside the palace; for no one of their fellow-soldiers had barred the way, and the porters and other freedmen, so far from making any door fast, had actually opened absolutely all the entrances.

> The soldiers on seeing him were at first abashed, all save one, and kept their eyes on the ground, and they thrust their swords back into their scabbards; but that one man leaped forward, exclaiming, "The soldiers have sent you this sword," and forthwith fell upon him and wounded him. Than his comrades no longer held back, but struck down their emperor together with Eclectus. The latter alone had not deserted him, but defended him as best he could, even wounding several of his assailants; hence I, who felt that even before that he had shown himself an excellent man, now thoroughly admired him. The soldiers cut off the head of Pertinax and fastened it on a spear, glorying in the deed. Thus did Pertinax, who undertook to restore everything in a moment, come to his end. He failed to comprehend, though a man of wide practical experience, that one cannot with safety reform everything at once, and that the restoration of a state, in particular, requires both time and wisdom. He had lived sixty-seven years, lacking four months and three days, and had reigned eighty-seven days.

> 11 When the fate of Pertinax was noised about, some ran to their homes and others to those of the soldiers, all taking thought for their own safety. But Sulpicianus, who had been sent by Pertinax to the camp to set matters in order there, remained on the spot, and intrigued to get himself appointed emperor. Meanwhile Didius Julianus, at once an insatiate money-getter and a wanton spendthrift, who was always eager for revolution and hence had been exiled by Commodus to his native city of Mediolanum, now, when he heard of the death of Pertinax, hastily made his way to the camp, and, standing at the gates of the enclosure, made bids to the soldiers for the rule over the Romans. Then ensued a most disgraceful business and one unworthy of Rome. For, just as if it had been in some market or auction-room, both the City and its entire empire were auctioned off. The sellers were the ones who had slain their emperor, and the would‑be buyers were Sulpicianus and Julianus, who vied to outbid each other, one from the inside, the other from the outside. They gradually raised their bids up to twenty thousand sesterces per soldier. Some of the soldiers would carry word to Julianus, "Sulpicianus offers so much; how much more do you make it?" And to Sulpicianus in turn, "Julianus promises so much; how much do you raise him?" Sulpicianus would have won the day, being inside and being prefect of the city and also the first to name the figure twenty thousand, had not Julianus raised his bid no longer by a small amount but by five thousand at one time, both shouting it in a loud voice and also indicating the amount with his fingers. So the soldiers, captivated by this excessive bid and at the same time fearing that Sulpicianus might avenge Pertinax (an idea that Julianus put into their heads), received Julianus inside and declared him emperor.

FWIW the praetorians also had also had a hand in the deaths of Caligula, Commodus, Caracalla , Elagabalus and a couple of others. They were far more dangerous to Rome’s rulers than to its enemies.

