# Who was the famous comedy writer in Ancient Greece?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2017-11-25
	views: 1698
	upvotes: 43
	quora url: /Who-was-the-famous-comedy-writer-in-Ancient-Greece/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Famous with whom?

From an __ancient__  perspective [Menander](http://www.theatrehistory.com/ancient/menander001.html) was the most popular and influential of the known comic playwrights. His record at the Athenian festivals is unrivalled — he won the prize at the [Lenaia](http://www.theposthole.org/read/article/314) eight times. He was definitely the most copied, as well: his stock characters and predictable situations were widely duplicated in Greek and Roman comedy. Every domineering old man, love-struck young milksop, and roguish slave from Plautus and Terence to_[A Funny Thing Happened on the way to the Forum](https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/funny_thing_happened_on_the_way_to_the_forum/)_ __ ultimately derives from Menander’s stock of stereotypes. If Herodotus is the father of history, Menander is the father of the sitcom.

However, due to tricks of preservation (or, perhaps, to history possessing and unsuspected sense of humor) his own work survives mostly in fragments; only the _[Dyskolos](http://www.ancient-literature.com/greece_menander_dyskolos.html)_ [ ](http://www.ancient-literature.com/greece_menander_dyskolos.html)(“the misanthrope” ) is known in a more or less complete form, though several long pieces have emerged from the deserts of Egypt in the last century.

At least in part because of the surviving texts __modern__  studies of Greek comedy are dominated by [Aristophanes](http://www.ancient-literature.com/greece_aristophanes.html) — eleven of whose plays survive more or less intact. However Aristophanes only won the Lenaia prize three times during his career (and once at the [Dionysia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dionysia)). He probably owes his survival to the fact that Byzantine scholars were strongly biased in favor of classical Attic style, and found Menander too late and insufficiently archaic. It’s been said that Victorian schoolmasters were afraid Aristophanes would corrupt the purity of their pupils’ morals, while Byzantine schoolmasters were more worried that Menander would corrupt the purity of their Greek.

I have to admit a strong personal preference for the more inventive, unpredictable and pointed comedies of Aristophanes. His comic imagination has few rivals, ancient or modern. His acerbic commentary on the great events of his day — the life of Socrates, the Athenian empire, and the Peloponessian war, to name a few — has the rude vigor of an angry student review (in both senses of “rude”). His combination of pointed satire, absurdism, and imagination will please anybody who grew up on Monty Python. Aristophanes had the good luck to live in a free city at the height of its self confidence and power: he could afford to say what he wanted. Menander lived in an era of humorless kings, and had to watch what he said. His neverland settings and Arcadian characters are safe choices for a less free time.

That said, though, Menander far from untalented. His dramatic pacing was a significant technical improvement over older models, and his action moves along without the clunky intervention of a chorus. His characters have some actual humanity, unlike the brash caricatures that Aristophanes prefer; and he deserves some credit for the fact that his slaves are always fully rounded human beings. One of the great misused Latin quotes is _Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum puto, “_ I’m a human, and I think nothing human is alien to me” is the Roman comedian [Terence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terence) making a free translation of one of Menander’s clever, self-aware slaves.

To round out the comparison, here’s what [Plutarch had to say about both](https://archive.org/stream/moraliainfifteen10plutuoft#page/462/mode/2up).

> Coarseness in words, vulgarity and ribaldry are present in Aristophanes, but not at all in Menander; obviously, for the uneducated, ordinary person is captivated by what the former says, but the educated man will be displeased. I refer to antitheses and similar endings and plays on words. For of these Menander does make use with proper consideration and rarely, believing that they should be treated with care, but Aristophanes employs them frequently, inopportunely, and frigidly; for his punning is applauded… Moreover, in his diction there are tragic, comic, pompous, and prosaic elements, obscurity, vagueness, dignity, and elevation, loquacity and sickening nonsense. And with all these differences and dissimilarities his use of words does not give to each kind its fitting and appropriate use; I mean, for example, to a king his dignity, to an orator his eloquence, to a woman her artlessness, to an ordinary man his prosaic speech, to a market-lounger his vulgarity; but he assigns to his characters as if by lot such words as happen to turn up, and you could not tell whether the speaker is son or father, a rustic or a god, or an old woman or a hero. But Menander's diction is so polished and its ingredients mingled into so consistent a whole that, although it is employed in connexion with many emotions and many types of character and adapts itself to persons of every kind, it nevertheless appears as one and preserves its uniformity in common and familiar words in general use; but if the action should anywhere call for strange and deceptive language and for bluster, he opens, as it were, all the stops of his flute, but then quickly and plausibly clothes them and brings the sound back to its natural quality. And although there have been many noted artisans, no shoemaker ever made the same shoe, no mask-maker the same mask, and no tailor the same cloak, that would be appropriate at the same time for man and woman and youth and old man and domestic slave; but Menander so blended his diction that it comports with every nature, disposition, and age, and he did this although he entered upon his career while still a young man and died at the height of his powers as playwright and poet….

Generally the genteel literateurs of antiquity followed Plutarch’s preference for Menanders humanity over Aristophanes inventiveness, though modern readers more often reverse the ranking.

