# Why did the Greeks resist the Persians but accept Roman rule?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2017-04-23
	views: 8716
	upvotes: 72
	quora url: /Why-did-the-Greeks-resist-the-Persians-but-accept-Roman-rule/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


I think [Evangelos Lolos](https://www.quora.com/profile/Evangelos-Lolos) sets the contrast up pretty well. However, I’d emphasize one critical distinction between the critical years of Persian conquest and their Roman counterparts.

__Persia__ 

The Greece which fought the Persians had never been united, even nominally; the sense of Greek nationhood was still very much in flux at the time. The appearance of a large and powerful enemy in the heartland of traditional Greece changed they way Greeks saw themselves: the experience of defeating the Persians helped to create a national consciousness that didn’t really exist before; the ideal of Panhellenism — the feeling that Greece could and should unite around common goals — first found expression in the wake of the Persian war and became widely influential in Greek sentiment in the century before Alexander. In the early 4th century BC rhetoricians and poets spread the ideal of Greek union in literature which eventually became canonical for later Greeks.

However, the Greeks turned out to be terrible at putting this ideal into practice. Athens and Sparta both used panhellenist rhetoric in their bids for leadership in Greece — but both tended to enrich themselves at the expense of fellow Greeks whenever the opportunity arose. More damningly, both were happy to take Persian money when they were on the losing side of a conflict: the Spartans [won the Peloponnesian war on Persian gold](https://www.quora.com/What-were-the-advantages-the-Spartans-had-over-the-Athenians/answer/Steve-Theodore); the Athenians took Persian money in the Corinthian war. Finally the the Spartans signed on to the [Peace of Antalcidas](http://www.historyofwar.org/articles/peace_antalcidas.html) at the end of that war, which basically made them Persia’s enforcers in mainland Greece and abandoned any pretense of rescuing the Ionian Greeks from the barbarians.

In other words — resistance to Persia was an _anomaly_ , not the norm. It remained a vague cultural ideal — but not one that had much practical impact — for the rest of Greek history. Even at the time “resistance” wasn’t really universal; Boeotian, Thessalian and Ionian contingents fought for the Great King at Salamis and Plataea; Greek mercenaries could be found in Persian armies fighting Alexander. To some degree the Roman situation reflected a fairly widespread recognition in Greece that panhellenism was sham.

__After Alexander__ 

For 200 years after Alexander, the successor empires used panhellenic rhetoric in their conflicts, but none of them ever seriously considered ‘freeing’ Greece. Against that backdrop, laying down your life to protect Greece from the Romans didn’t seem particularly appealing when protecting it from the Romans meant handing it over to the Macedonians, the Syrians, or the Ptolemies. All of the wars which brought Roman armies into Greece were wars against the successor kingdoms — not against “Greece”. Roman dominance in Greece was established by a [war against the the Syrians](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman%E2%80%93Seleucid_War) and a [war against Macedonia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second_Macedonian_War): the Romans became the patrons of Greek cities by defeating their foreign overlords. Those overlords spoke Greek, it’s true — but in the hyper-local world of Greek politics the difference between a Greek-speaking Macedonian and a Greek-speaking Roman senator wasn’t necessarily decisive.

__Rome__ 

The Romans generally did a good job of convincing the Greeks that they were better overlords than the successor kings. They allowed greater autonomy and interfered less routinely in the internal workings of most Greek cities. You can get a sense of the flavor in Plutarch’s [Life of Flamininus](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/e/roman/texts/plutarch/lives/flamininus*.html):

> Accordingly, at the Isthmian games, where a great throng of people were sitting in the stadium and watching the athletic contests (since, indeed, after many years Greece had at last ceased from wars waged in hopes of freedom, and was now holding festival in time of assured peace), the trumpet signalled a general silence, and the herald, coming forward into the midst of the spectators, made proclamation that the Roman senate and Titus Quintius Flamininus proconsular general, having conquered King Philip and the Macedonians, restored to freedom, without garrisons and without imposts, and to the enjoyment of their ancient laws, the Corinthians, the Locrians, the Phocians, the Euboeans, the Achaeans of Phthiotis, the Magnesians, the Thessalians, and the Perrhaebians.

> At first, then, the proclamation was by no means generally or distinctly heard, but there was a confused and tumultuous movement in the stadium of people who wondered what had been said, and asked one another questions about it, and called out to have the proclamation made again; but when silence had been restored, and the herald in tones that were louder than before and reached the ears of all, had recited the proclamation, a shout of joy arose, so incredibly loud that it reached the sea. The whole audience rose to their feet, and no heed was paid to the contending athletes, but all were eager to spring forward and greet and hail the saviour and champion of Greece.

The main example of nationalist resistance to Rome came after the [Fourth Macedonian War](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourth_Macedonian_War), two generations after Flamininus “freed” the Greeks. The Macedonians were defeated in short order, but the Romans fell out with their erstwhile Greek allies in the aftermath. This lead to an anti-Roman reaction and the [Achaean War](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Achaean_War) — a was a poorly organized uprising which had strong overtones of social conflict inside Greece (the Romans tended to support the local upper classes, so Greece’s remaining democrats were the nucleus of the opposition). The revolt was also inflamed by a very naive misunderstanding of the[ war the Romans were fighting against Carthage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Third_Punic_War) at the same time. The rebellion led to [a very brutal Roman reaction](https://www.quora.com/What-were-the-Roman-motivations-for-invading-Corinth-in-146-BCE), but it was never a widespread resistance; only the Achaean territories in the northern Peloponessus were involved in the brief fighting.

Roman culture had grown up in the shadow of Greek culture: Romans got their letters from the Greeks of Campania; the earliest written Roman literature was in Greek, and most educated Romans spoke and read Greek. This minimized the gap between the conquerors and the conquered; by contrast the differences between Persian and Greek lifestyles were much larger. Perhaps for this reason the Roman ruling formula was a light burden on the Greeks. Persians — monarchists, after all — tended to support tyrants and strongmen rather than allowing any form of elective self government in their Greek possessions. Romans were much more familiar with the Greek pattern of republican governance; they allowed a lot of local autonomy, prevented inter-state warfare, and above allowed the local elites to remain important in local affairs . This made for a much more stable foundation, even if both sides remained conscious of their differences.

