# Why were so many tribes revolting against Roman rule or resisting it?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2017-10-14
	views: 4445
	upvotes: 137
	quora url: /Why-were-so-many-tribes-revolting-against-Roman-rule-or-resisting-it/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Actually, Roman rule was surprisingly stable, at least if you judge it by modern standards. While there was a good deal of resistance as the empire expanded, very few areas that Romanized ever expelled the Romans or spawned long-lasting rebellions.

It’s always worth remembering that process of acquiring new provinces was pretty violent, but once an area became part of the Roman world there were a number of interlocking factors which tended to pull it into the Roman orbit. Rome could fairly be described as a multicultural empire; from very early on the Romans were self-consciously willing to incorporate the people they conquered into their system. This openness was a huge help in maintaining imperial stability: membership in the Roman system allowed local aristocrats (the sort of folks who formed the nucleus of potential violent opposition to Roman power) to get more of the things they cared about in life: money, social prestige, and protection from competition. Your average Gallic chieftain, Numidian king, or Greek aristocrat was _still important_  after the Roman takeover — and they suddenly found that they also had ready access to luxury goods from all over the Roman world, to opportunities for military glory in far-flung properties, and — not an inconsiderable advantage — the nearest Roman legion handy if a local competitor looked likely to overturn the existing local order.

It’s certainly true that there was always opposition as well. But unlike the modern world, there was only the dimmest glimmering of what we’d recognize as nationalism. People were generally just as unhappy to be pushed around by people unlike themselves as we are today — but there wasn’t a conscious ideology which taught people that linguistic or ethnic groupings were the “natural” political unit. It was a world where local clan and lineage loyalties often mattered more than loyalty to the “nation”.

In that kind of world, plenty of non-Romans felt just fine about cooperating with the Roman order as opposed to some other grouping which might have been staffed by their hereditary rivals. For example [Arminius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arminius), the famous German resistance leader who engineered the Roman defeat in the[ Teutoburg Forest](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_the_Teutoburg_Forest), ended up fighting against his own father-in-law and the [rival king of the Suebi nation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maroboduus). The Romans made the best of this situation: they were very canny about managing local rivalries to their own advantage. In English we say “divide and conquer”, but in Latin the phrase is _divide et impera_ : “Divide and _rule”._ 

The complex balancing act that the Romans practiced is perfectly displayed in Gaul (France). [Caesar’s conquest of Gaul](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gallic_Wars) (59–50 BC) was uncommonly violent and even many Romans — at least among Caesar’s political enemies — regarded it as unjustified. It was attended with tremendous destruction and loss of life — but it was only possible because the Gauls were at least as eager to fight each other as they were to fight the Romans. The Romans severely repressed Gallic Druids, because they represented a focus of possible opposition to Rome — but Gauls who were willing to play by Roman rules were welcomed. Within a century of Caesar there were [Gauls in the Roman senate](https://www.quora.com/Why-did-Emperor-Claudius-ban-druidism). Well before that time Gallic warriors formed a significant fraction of the “Roman” legions which fought in Germany, the Balkans, and Britain. The [last major revolt among the Gauls](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julius_Sabinus) ended with a Gallic aristocrat (and Roman officer) attempting to make himself Roman emperor, rather than liberating Gaul from Roman domination.

One important element of the whole system was that the Roman “world” was much larger then the Roman empire. For reasons of economy, the Romans often preferred to install and maintain friendly regimes along their borders, rather than to rule directly. This was a valuable way of limiting possible resistance: the rivalries and clashes inside a client kingdom protected Roman borders and also provided an alternative focus for anti-Roman sentiment. Some of these relations lasted for a very long time: the [Bosporan Kingdom](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bosporan_Kingdom) in the Black Sea was a Roman client state for several hundred years. But in other cases — the most famous example is probably Judea under the [Herodian dynasty](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herodian_dynasty), which imploded in fratricide and misgovernment — the Romans eventually stepped in and began ruling directly.

Judea is a good example of an area where the Roman model definitely did not work well. The inhabitants had a strong ethnic consciousness — in a lot of ways they invented the modern “nation-state” idea before the rest of the ancient world — and their traditions were strong enough to make it hard for local elites to simply don Roman garb and re-invent themselves as Romans without losing local credibility. The Romans and Jews fought a [series of increasingly bitter wars](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jewish%E2%80%93Roman_wars) which culminated in the virtual destruction of the Jewish homeland. When a local group could not or would not accept the Roman bargain — essentially, “you can play on our team if you play by our rules” — the alternative was brutal repression. In a pre-nationalist world most people chose to play along, but for those who didn’t the Romans had little mercy.



* You could make a good, if ironic, case that the best example of purely “because-we-can” imperialism in Roman history is [the conquest of Britain](https://www.quora.com/Why-did-the-Romans-attempt-to-conquer-Britain/answer/Steve-Theodore).

