# Before the nineteenth century, how much was known about Egyptian mythology and religion?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2019-06-05
	views: 981
	upvotes: 36
	quora url: /Before-the-nineteenth-century-how-much-was-known-about-Egyptian-mythology-and-religion/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


There was a lot of misinformation, but very little of substance.

There were only a handful of sources — all in Greek — which gave Europeans (and sometimes Arabic readers as well) some insight into ancient Egyptian practices. Unfortunately the most widespread and the popular ones were also very late and unreliable, reflecting the philosophical atmosphere of the Roman empire rather than actual Egyptian practice.

Here’s what people had to go on:

__[Manetho](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manetho)__  was an ethnic Egyptian, a priest who lived and worked under either Ptolemy I or Ptolemy II. He’s really the only source which could claim a very direct connection to Egyptian traditions that were not heavily filtered through Greek ideas. He wrote about the history of Egypt and Egyptian ritual practices. Unfortunately none of his work survives intact, but there are large fragments included in quotations by Roman-era authors. He was used extensively as a resource by later writers so we have a good bit of what he wrote (the complete fragments are [digitized online here](https://archive.org/details/manethowithengli00maneuoft/page/n29), in Greek and English).

Unfortunately for students of Egyptian religion most of what we have from relates to chronology and king-lists rather than theology. Manetho was widely quoted in polemics between Jews and Egyptians and then later between Christians and Pagans, but much of what survives relates to dates and dynasties (he’s the ultimate source of the way we still number dynasties). The edition linked above includes a few scraps of philosophical and religious information — but they are just a handful of paragraphs (starting on page 187).

One of the the most widely read piece of “Egyptian theology” was __[De Iside et Osiride](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3atext%3a2008.01.0239)__ __,__  “On Isis and Osiris,” by the first/second century Greek author Plutarch. It offers a detailed philosophical interpretation of the Isis-Osiris myth cycle and the symbolism surrounding it. Unfortunately it is not an accurate guide to ancient Egyptian thought and practice: that’s not surprising, since it was written after almost five centuries of Greek dominance in Egypt. Instead, the book is heavily overlaid with Greek ideas and philosophical concerns. That mix of Egyptian trappings and Greek ideas reflects the deliberate policy of the later Ptolemies who supported a synthesis of Greek and Egyptian beliefs intended to unite the two constituent populations of their empire. Cleopatra, in particular, made a point of exporting the cult of Isis during her reign as a reflection of Egypt’s claims to cultural prominence.

A rather similar view of the Isis cult (in its second century form) figures in the Latin novel __[The Golden Ass](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Golden_Ass)__  by Apuleius.

A similar philosophical gloss on Egyptian beliefs was the __[Theurgia of Iamblichus](http://www.esotericarchives.com/oracle/iambl_th.htm)__ , a Neo-Platonic philosopher of the third century. He follows Plutarch in presenting Egyptian mythology as an allegory, the idea being that important philosophical truths were concealed from the ignorant masses behind the stories of miracles and monsters. This was a very common Greek philosophical approach: other philosophers did the same thing for Homer and traditional Greek tales too, and fellow neo-Platonists provided a similar allegorized interpretation of Near Eastern traditions in the form of the [Chaldean Oracles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaldean_Oracles). Iamblichus provides some indirect evidence for Egyptian rituals, since he has to describe them in order to reveal their “inner meanings”. However very few modern scholars think Iamblichus or his followers use Egyptian thought for much more than window-dressing.

A less sophisticated — but in the long run, more influential — view of Egyptian culture came from the __[Corpus Hermeticum](https://hermetic.com/texts/hermetica/index)__ , a miscellaneous collection of Egyptian themed texts from the first through the third centuries. The “Hermes” here is really supposed to be the Egyptian god Thoth, who was the keeper of cosmic wisdom. The Hermetic texts included a few pieces which look like they actually reflect native Egyptian traditions but these tend to be outweighed by a lot of untraceable elements including Babylonian astronomy, Greek science and pseudo-science, Gnosticism, and folk magic. The Corpus Hermeticum was extremely popular in the Renaissance and early modern period: many tropes you might recognize as hallmarks of Renaissance thinking (for example, the “[macrocosm and microcosm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macrocosm_and_microcosm)” and the “[great chain of being](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_chain_of_being)” ) come from the Hermetic tradition and became staples of many Early-Modern era forms of mysticism, including a lot of the symbolic trappings of [Masonry](http://freemasoninformation.com/2013/12/freemasonry-and-hermetica/).

The last influential source was the very late __[Hieroglyphica of Horapollo](http://www.sacred-texts.com/egy/hh/index.htm)__ , from the fifth century, which purported to be a guide to the meanings of Egyptian hieroglyphs. Unfortunately, it’s almost entirely fallacious. Some signs are correctly identified but most are given meanings which are completely incorrect. The primary use of this text today is to illustrate how completely knowledge of hieroglyphic writing system had decayed by the fifth century. This text was widely quoted in the Renaissance and early modern period, giving rise to many [wildly inaccurate readings of hieroglyphic texts](https://publicdomainreview.org/2013/05/16/athanasius-kircher-and-the-hieroglyphic-sphinx/).

To sum up: There were quite a few texts floating around (primarily in Greek) that purported to reflect Egyptian religion or philosophy. However these were ultimately the products of Greek, rather than Egyptian culture; the Egyptian elements seem primarily to reflect the complex melding of cultures in Hellenistic Alexandria where all sorts of traditions rubbed shoulders. Greeks and Romans used “Egyptian” motifs as symbols of the antique and exotic, but they don’t seem to have engaged very deeply with the actual content. When 19th century scholars learned to read Egyptian texts for real, they were rather surprised to find how little the preceding millennium of “Egyptian studies” reflected the actual world of Egypt before the Greeks and Persians. The texts which Renaissance and Early-Modern scholars used to learn about Egypt are studied today primarily to learn about the history of mysticism, occultism, and alchemy.

