# Early 300s, I'm a farmer living near Rome. Suppose the city gets cut from the North African grain supply because the people there are rebelling against the emperor. Should I be worried about plunder from the city dwellers?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2019-12-22
	views: 745
	upvotes: 34
	quora url: /Early-300s-Im-a-farmer-living-near-Rome-Suppose-the-city-gets-cut-from-the-North-African-grain-supply-because-the-people-there-are-rebelling-against-the-emperor-Should-I-be-worried-about-plunder-from-the-city/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


If the source of the problem is really local to North Africa, you should probably be more worried about the government than the people.

In the early 300’s you’ll be dealing with a highly centralized, command-and-control version of the Roman Empire. Emperor [Diocletian](https://www.ancient.eu/Diocletian/) had brought stability to the empire after fifty years of civil wars. Unfortunately, Diocletian was a soldier, not an economist: trying to keep Roman armies in the field in a period of increasing pressure from the Persians and from barbarians in Europe he instituted a far-reaching effort to bring the entire civilian economy under military control. [Taxes went up and prices were strictly regulated.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edict_on_Maximum_Prices)

Depending on who you are, this probably does not mean good news for you. In the event of a local famine the best thing you can expect is that you’ll be forced to sell your grain to the government at the “fair” price — where fairness did not include a nod to the laws of supply and demand. If you tried to get around the edict and charge a higher price, both you and your purchaser were liable to the death penalty.

Although no pre-modern government had the bureaucratic wherewithal to micro-manage a local economy very effectively, fourth century Romans still tried mightily. Treasury officials had wide ranging powers to sniff out any kind of dissent or disobedience, and they were notorious both for the extent of their powers and their willingness to abuse them. It would not be surprising if the famine found you selling your grain to a local _frumentarius_  or _agent in rebus_ at cut-rate prices to avoid a grislier fate than bankruptcy. The ravenous taxation of this period saw the first beginnings of the retreat from an urban market economy towards a culture of rural self-sufficiency that we would regard as more “medieval” than “classical.” When the market had terrible risks, many people (particularly wealthy ones) found it easier to live a cashless (and thus less taxable) existence away from the eye of the state. That development would not really accelerate until the end of the century, however.

That proto-feudal note does raise another important consideration: in the fourth century Italy didn’t actually have a lot of small farmers. The peninsula had been dominated by large estates since before the end of the Republic. So “farmer” might mean you were a _colonus_ , a tenant farmer who worked on somebody else’s land — or it might mean you owned a thousand acres with a vast staff of slaves and coloni to work them. In the latter case you’ll probably be just fine, since you’ll have the makings of a small temporary private army ready to hand and you’ll probably have politically powerful friends as well. Fourth century Roman politics could be quite hairy, so you’d have to pick your friends wisely. But if your holdings were sufficiently large you’re probably the kind of person who could actually find a way around those strict price regulations and actually turn a profit on the famine, unlike a humbler tiller of the soil.

On the plus side, in the early fourth century the empire still had the logistical resources to respond to local crises. In the 360’s, for example, Antioch was hit by a serious famine while Julian the Apostate was preparing his doomed campaign against the Persians. He did import a lot of grain from Egypt — though he also forced a lot of Antiochene landowners to sell their precious grain at below-market prices, earning a lot of opposition from local elites. Constantinople would not be founded until 324 and would not begin to rival Rome in population for several decades. This meant that the granaries of Egypt would be available to stave off disaster in Rome even if those Carthage were shut off.

__TLDR:__ it’s unlikely that your estate would be overrun by hordes of starving citizens: if it came to that the empire would almost certainly turn its soldiers against the refugees before allowing large-scale devastation of the tax-paying countryside. However, as a small farmer you’d probably be reduced to squirreling away whatever you could for yourself and your family and praying that the local representatives of the emperor weren’t too inquisitive. As a big landowner you’re probably better off — unless the empire decides (as it did on occasion) to deflect the anger of the populace onto wealthy scapegoat “hoarders” and “speculators”.

