# The Latins had their Latin League, and the Etruscans had their Etruscan League. How many similar leagues were formed in Italy, what did belonging to one mean for a city, and what caused leagues to form in place of empires (until Rome)?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2019-04-10
	views: 1828
	upvotes: 45
	quora url: /The-Latins-had-their-Latin-League-and-the-Etruscans-had-their-Etruscan-League-How-many-similar-leagues-were-formed-in-Italy-what-did-belonging-to-one-mean-for-a-city-and-what-caused-leagues-to-form-in-place-of/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Mostly it’s a survival mechanism — individual city states are extremely vulnerable to larger powers.

The same thing happened in Greece where there were leagues in [Achaea](https://www.ancient.eu/Achaean_League/), [Aetolia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aetolian_League), [Arcadia ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arcadian_League)and many less famous regions for the same reason. Increasing populations and military sophistication made city states increasingly vulnerable in isolation — something the Athenians and Spartans demonstrated to everyone during the Peloponnesian war.

The advantages of joining a league were obvious to an ambitious local aristocrat: mutual defense, better bargaining power, and more opportunities for local elites to shine on a larger stage. Moreover, a city that didn’t join a league voluntarily might be forced into one anyway on worse terms. Thus, leagues tended to snowball. In both Greece and Italy league formation usually followed pre-existing linguistic-ethnic boundaries, but this was always negotiable: Rome itself was a kind of Etruscan-Latin hybrid, and also included a significant Sabine population. The Campanian league (sometimes also known as the “Capuan League”) included Oscan tribes descended from the Samnites and both Greek and Etruscan cities. The Samnites for a while included the Umbrian-speaking Marsi, who later became part of the Roman sphere of influence.

In Italy where “tribal” ties among language groups were strong the line between a federal league and a tribal/ethnic grouping is a bit fuzzy. Lowland groupings could be more like a Greek city-state federation and highland peoples could act more like clan confederacies. However the differences are more of degree than of essence: in the end the key dynamic was combining larger groups of local power centers into one for mutual advantage. The big groupings were the [Etruscans](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Etruscan_civilization#Etruscan_League), [Latins](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_League), [Samnites](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samnites), and [Campanians ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Campanians)— all but the last of which were roughly grouped by language. There’s some doubt about whether the Umbrians had a formal league structure or not. The Greek cities of the south also had a league, which modern scholars call the [Italiote League ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Italiotes)— but we are not sure if this was one long-lived alliance or two unrelated ones at different times.

Unfortunately for modern historians, the ancient writers rarely distinguish between ethnic groups and formal political entities, so it’s often hard to know when an action is being ascribed to a state or a looser grouping, and how their institutions evolved over time. It’s particularly tough because of the dearth of sources: most of what we know comes from Roman or Greek accounts of Rome’s rise to power; we don’t any literary sources that present the perspective of Rome’s Italian rivals.

We do know that a league would usually have some kind of common meeting place and shared religious observances intended to solemnize and symbolize group unity. There would be some kind of arrangement for rotating power to make sure no member of the alliance had too much power — despite the political necessity the leagues were not unitary states and local identities remained paramount. The Samnites, for example, ordinarily worked through a council of the _meddixes_ , the chief executives of the Samnite tribal groupings which met in the different tribal sanctuaries on a rotating basis. In times of war they elected a single war-leader, like [Gaius Pontius](https://www.unrv.com/bio/gaius-pontius.php) — but, like Roman consuls, these leaders served for limited terms.

The Roman bias of our sources makes Roman expansion seem more exceptional than it really is. Rome’s successful cooptation of defeated rivals is a logical extension of the way many of the federal leagues behaved — right up to and including the fact that these alliance structures were expanded by conquest as well as by voluntary federation. The key difference is that the Roman “league” permanently centralized foreign and defense policy in Roman institutions, rather than in federal ones. This gave the Roman alliance structure more coherence over time. Still, the elites of Rome’s subject allies remained in control of local affairs — and because the Romans were fairly liberal with grants of citizenship to important friends the non-Roman elite had a political say in Rome as well, though a deliberately muted one. This provided a very effective mix of positive incentives (loot, glory, and political headroom for the upper classes among the allies ) alongside a coercive military force that got stronger with each new addition. This proved to be a literally unbeatable combination for Rome’s Italian neighbors.

