# Was Cicero legally allowed to sentence the Catiline conspirators to death?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2019-04-20
	views: 1835
	upvotes: 53
	quora url: /Was-Cicero-legally-allowed-to-sentence-the-Catiline-conspirators-to-death/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


This was a hotly contested political question at the time.

Cicero’s defenders point to the _[senatus consultum ultimum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Senatus_consultum_ultimum)_ __ which the Senate voted on October 21, 63 BC — this was an emergency degree which was understood to give the sitting consuls wide-ranging powers for the preservation of public safety. If you interpret the decree (the “SCU,” as generations of graduate students have come to know it) as a kind of declaration of martial law, then the executions are justified as part of a larger emergency situation in which ordinary rules of criminal procedure are suspended. Cicero also like to point out that he asked for and was voted a Senatorial decree to execute the conspirators on December 5th — although the vote was not unanimous it did represent the majority opinion of the Senate — which contained all of Rome’s judges. It would seem superficially like a simple case.

Unfortunately, though, the SCU had a strange status in Roman law.

It was rare enough — it was only invoked seven times in Roman history — that it never evolved a clear set of legal boundaries. Moreover it had a long and rather sorry association with reactionary violence: the SCU was first invoked to sanction the killing of [Tiberius Gracchus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiberius_Gracchus) in 133, though in that instance the sitting consul refused to carry out the execution himself, claiming it was not legal, and the murder was committed instead by an aristocratic mob. In the wake of that killing the assembly (led by Tiberius’ brother [Gaius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Gracchus)) passed the _lex Sempronia de capite civis_ , which explicitly forbade the Senate to issue death sentences against Roman citizens without trial. Despite that Gaius himself was killed in another mob attack following another SCU in 121; that time, the consul was the instigator of the assault but he was acquitted in court. This series of traumatic events created a murky precedent for future applications of the emergency decree. The SCU was decreed two more times before Cicero’s consulship, but in neither case was a death penalty enacted. So, the legal status of the decree and the limits of its power remained ambiguous — and the bitter party political background of the law meant that it was far from a neutral matter of statute and precedent.

In the wake of Catiline’s uprising opinion was split between the aristocratic or conservative faction, which backed the executions, and the populists who opposed them. This maps quite neatly onto the prior history of the SCU: the populists had always denied the right of the Senate to execute Roman citizens without trial, since that right was invented (more or less out of thin air) to justify the killing two populist leaders. The aristocrats, on the contrary, defended the Senate’s life-and-death powers because the Senate was by definition a stronghold of aristocratic privilege and the most powerful defense of the existing order. Cicero and Cato were the public figureheads of the former grouping, and Caesar the most prominent early exponent of the latter.

It’s worth pointing out that most ordinary Romans were not committed to either party, as the subsequent history of Cicero shows quite clearly. Already at the end of his term he was denied his traditional end-of-term speech by one of the tribunes for “executing citizens contrary to the laws,” though at that point (January of 62) there were still Catilinarian forces in arms and the population of the city at large was highly sympathetic to Cicero’s action: he was awarded the title “father of his country” for his actions. However the tables turned quite rapidly: in 58 the radical firebrand [Clodius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publius_Clodius_Pulcher) used his tribunate — and the tacit backing of Caesar — to enact a number of [traditional populist measures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leges_Clodiae), including a new version of the Lex Sempronia forbidding the Senate to pass the death penalty. The law was rather canny — rather than attempting to put Cicero on trial, where his famous legal skills and a sympathetic jury might acquit him, the law imposed the traditional penalty of exile _without_ requiring a trial: Cicero had to flee the country lest he be starved to death by Romans who were legally forbidden to allow him food or fire. Clodius’ law was thus just as ambiguous as the SCU it was intended to forestall, since it levied a penalty without trial.

The legality of Cicero’s actions has been argued for the last two millennia, but it’s almost always been a stalking horse for larger political allegiances: populists and Caesarians tend to accept that it was extralegal, conservatives and Republicans tend to disagree. Legal formalism is not really the right lens for undestanding the tumultuous death of the Republic — it’s probably wiser to remember what Cicero himself said: ___[Silent enim leges inter armas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter_arma_enim_silent_leges)___ ___,___ _“in battle the voice of the law is silent.”_ It’s a particularly emblematic quote because it was written[ as part of Cicero’s defense of Clodius’ murderer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pro_Milone) — but Cicero himself did not actually deliver the speech, because the trial was itself conducted under armed guard with the threat of violence at every turn and he lost his nerve.*



*Milo himself, convicted and living in exile, read the written version that’s come down to us and said, essentially “if he’d actually done this in court I wouldn’t be here.”

