# What percentage of the budget did the Roman Empire spend on the military?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2019-04-14
	views: 14950
	upvotes: 154
	quora url: /What-percentage-of-the-budget-did-the-Roman-Empire-spend-on-the-military/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


At the peak of Roman prosperity — roughly around the year 100 — a good ballpark estimate for the total spending of the Roman state is a nice round billion sesterces a year, with about 2/3 of that going to the military. This estimate is borrowed from [The Roman Empire and the Indian Ocean](https://amzn.to/2IvybgZ) by Raoul McLaughlin.* Unfortunately that’s a suspiciously round number for a reason: we don’t really have the kind of data we’d like to make confident statements about the finances of the Roman state.

That billion-HS estimate includes a vast number of variables that can’t really be accounted for. The military figure (estimated at 640 million sesterces a year) can at least be derived from troop numbers and recorded salaries but most of the rest is pure guesswork.

Even the military portion of the estimate is squishy on close inspection. Quite a few emperors secured their own positions with massive bribes to the army: the infamous [Didius Julianus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Didius_Julianus#Career_as_Emperor) bought his own accession to the throne with a payment which — had he lived to actually pay it out — would probably have been half a billion sesterces by itself; those kinds of expenses effectively bankrupted the Roman state on a couple of occasions. On the other side of the balance sheet were the occasional moments of military profit as well: the _low_  estimate for the [treasure of the Dacian king Decebalus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decebalus_Treasure), conquered by Trajan, would be about 125 million sesterces of silver and another 25 million sesterces or so worth of gold — 15% of a year’s budget, taken in a single stroke. Most of that was spent on lavish celebrations (123 days of games and festivals at Rome!) but also on public works, like Trajan’s market near the Forum. The same campaign netted half a million slaves.

So — ordinary annual allowances, even though they are at least easy to estimate, don’t necessarily reflect the real flow of money to (or from) the Roman army.

The remainder, the civilian portion, would be [dominated by the expenses of feeding the city of Rome](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cura_Annonae): every year as many as 10 million bushels of wheat were brought from Egypt, North Africa, and Sicily to feed the city (which, for much of the Roman period, had a population about as large as the British Isles _combined_ ). Large public works (harbors, aqueducts, and so on) were expensive but often financed by what you might call “public-private partnerships” — sometimes for gain, but often the money came from ambitious noblemen who wanted to attract the attention of imperial authorities by contributing showily to the public good.

That last bit is a reminder that it’s a mistake to think of the Roman state as having a “budget” in the modern sense at all. Both income and outlays were bewilderingly complex because of the infinity of special arrangements between powerful groups — two cities thirty miles apart might have entirely different relationships to the central government’s coffers; so could two individuals living on the same street. Moreover the line between “state” finances and the emperor’s _personal_  spending was extremely fuzzy: many emperors treated the state as a personal bank account, while others spent large amounts of their personal wealth on public purposes. The billion-HS estimate of Roman spending included a hand-waved figure between 50 and 100 million sesterces, or 5-10% of the total, for “the emperor’s household.” Some of that was effectively paying for the bureaucracy, [many of whom were the emperor’s slaves](https://amzn.to/2Xd29u2).* But some of it went to extravagances like palaces, lavish entertainments, or [100-foot-high statues](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colossus_of_Nero).

It’s also very important to remember that at every level of Roman public spending, public purposes were accomplished by informal personal means — games in the arena, new temples, famine relief and disaster recovery were often left to the initiative of local aristocrats who wanted to make a name for themselves, or sometimes to emperors acting in their capacity as private gentlemen. During the period when this practice (“[euergetism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euergetism)”, the “doing of good deeds”) was central to aristocratic self-presentation it accounted for a vast — but impossible to quantify — fraction of what in a modern state would be public expenditure.

A final reason it’s so hard to get a handle on the Roman budget is that the balance between cash and kind — in both income and outlays — is very opaque. A huge amount of what we would expect to be collected in taxes was instead collected in the form of either quasi-feudal collections in kind or forced sales at below-market prices. Much of those 10 million bushels of wheat were exacted in the form of tribute from the farmers of Egypt and North Africa. Elsewhere many important public works — road maintenance, irrigation, and so on — were maintained by hapless rural populations, the predecessors of medieval serfs. We don’t have any reliable way to estimate the value of all of that, and how to divvy it up between “Roman” government and the myriad local institutions that also took a share of people’s lives. There’s also the vexed question of slavery: the state and the emperor owned a lot of slaves (in fact, most “civil servants” were slaves or ex-slaves) — modern accounting doesn’t really have a handle on how to represent that on a P&L statement.

One thing we know, however, is that eventually the cost of the Roman military outstripped the state’s ability to pay. The process is extremely complicated and subject to endless arguments by specialists, but after the third century or so the military essentially nationalized vast swathes of the Roman economy, instituting a primitive kind of command-and-control economy that was needed (like the Soviet version) to support a defense establishment which the civilian economy could not. Wealth tended to flee from the cities, where taxmen were numerous, into the countryside where self-sufficiency and barter helped to avoid the tax bills: the beginnings of feudalism. In the west, the end result was a state that eventually was unable to protect itself against the invasions the fifth century — there was not enough cash, the economy was slack, and there were too many discontented rural people who no longer cared enough for the Roman state to lift a finger in its defense.



* FWIW that’s an American billion, ie 1,000,000,000.

