# Why were only landed men allowed to join the Roman Army pre-Gaius Marius?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2019-11-13
	views: 741
	upvotes: 26
	quora url: /Why-were-only-landed-men-allowed-to-join-the-Roman-Army-pre-Gaius-Marius/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


The property qualifications harkback to the dim mists of the early republic — a period for which, unfortunately, our information is often very imcomplete.

In the earliest days of Rome — prior to, say, the first Punic war, around 260 BC — the Roman army was organized very much like a Greek city-state militia. The key similarity is that __everybody provided their own equipment.__  So, in the “Servian” army (named for the legendary king Servius Tullius) the property qualifications lined up with troop types.

On top of the military pyramid were people rich enough to supply their own warhorses; these were the _equites (_ sometimes erroneously translated as the “knights”) who provided the cavalry but generally also the leadership cadre of the army. The first class of citizens were equipped like Greek hoplites, with armor, greaves, and a heavy shield. This was expensive stuff; it was assumed you needed about 100,000 bronze pieces to be able to afford it. The second class used a different shield and their equipage didn’t include a breastplate. The third class didn’t have greaves either. The fourth class still fought in the line of battle, but only brought a shield, a spear and a sword. The fifth class comprised slingers and javelineers who didn’t bring much besides their weapons. If you could not supply even that much you might serve as a laborer or a sutler.

__This self-funded army mapped onto politics as well__ : in the republic voting was essentially by military formations — what the Romans called the [Centuriate Assembly](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Centuriate_Assembly#:~:targetText=The%20Centuriate%20Assembly%20(Latin%3A%20comitia,one%20hundred%20men%20by%20classes) — and it was heavily weighted by troop-type (and thus by wealth): the first-class troops provided 80 “centuries” of voters; the vastly more numerous fifth class provided only 30 and they only voted in the event of a deadlock among their social superiors. From the standpoint of the Roman elite, this was a very desirable structure: it provided a voice for the concerns of the less well-off, but it wasn’t a _loud_  voice.

Over the course of the Punic wars and the conquest of northern Italy the system became a bit more flexible, though the basic principle remained the same: membership in the military , wealth, and citizenship were tightly coupled. The armies of the 3rd and 2d centuries BC took account of experience as well as property, so a 4th-class _[hastatus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hastati)_ who did well as a soldier might be able to make his way up into the ranks of the heavier-armed [principes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principes). On the other hand a _[veles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Velites)_ _,_ a skirmisher, was a skirmisher because he could not afford a mail coat and a pot helmet. And only in the direst emergencies would the Romans allow the truly impoverished to bear arms. The powers that be remained wedded to the idea of a pyramidal military structure that reflected the stratification of society.

The second Punic War (218–201 BC) and the final conquest of northen Italy ( 202 - 192 BC) __disrupted the traditional social fabric of the peninsula__ : three decades of war left many people displaced, while the spoils of war went disproportionately to the very rich, who used them to create vast estates (often staffed with POW-slaves). This decimated the traditional small-hold farmers who made up the bulk of the old Roman army. It was harder to find people wealthy enough to fill out the traditional battlefield roles using their own resources, while the peninsula was full of the dispossessed who had no real hope of achieving the kind of independence that their grandparents might have known: there was no real Roman equivalent to moving to the big city and getting a factory job. The old social pyramid started to resemble a spike instead: a small number of extremely wealthy people presiding over a much larger mass who were barely self-sufficient.

So, Marius’ reforms reflected a really critical change in the social landscape of Italy. The availability of a large but impoverished pool of manpower, together with a state which had a lot more cash in reserve, made it possible to create large standing armies out of landless proletarians.

Social conservatives worried — quite rightly, as the events of the next century would show — that these new armies would unbalance the traditional relationship between property and political power, threatening the traditional dominance of the landed gentry. On the other hand the new armies were also military powerhouses: long-service professionals were ultimately far more effective soldiers than the citizen militias of yore. The linkage between military power and political power remained, but it tended to reverse itself: the successful general, backed by veterans who owed a lot to him personally and who could be relied upon to support in politics and, if needed, in the streets became the primary political force of the first century BC, leading ultimately to death of the republic.

