# Did the ancient Athenians know something about governing themselves that we Americans have missed?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-05-25
	views: 1130
	upvotes: 21
	quora url: /Did-the-ancient-Athenians-know-something-about-governing-themselves-that-we-Americans-have-missed/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


It's absolutely correct to object that women slaves and foreigners all had no say in Athenian democracy. The percentage of people living in Athens who actually formed part of the assembly fluctuated from about 10% of the total population up to around 25% (the influx of slaves in wartime, the loss of large numbers of citizens in battle at, eg, Syracuse, and immigration by non-citizens in peacetime moved that figure around a good bit).

On the other hand, even 10% or the population actively engaging in governance -- which was required of any Athenian citizen -- __completely dwarfs__  the participation of modern citizens in their own affairs.

As a modern, enlightened, multicultural denizen of London or New York or Paris your chances of being randomly selected by lot to, say, supervise the collection of taxes for a year, or to join a diplomatic mission to Russia, or to command a field army amount to precisely 0%. The only civic responsibility you'll be expected to bear is to pay your taxes and (optionally, unless you are Austrian) to vote. On the plus side, if you were chosen in Athens you had to pass an end-of-term scrutiny which could end in a death sentence if you had abused your office; _insert snarky remark about modern politician of your choice here._ 

And of course the odds that your vote matters are not good.

In the best case case, you'll be voting for one of a handful of candidates, pre-selected for you by political parties -- and the odds are quite high, depending on where you live, that your choice won't matter in any way, since most elections in the developed world are in areas completely dominated by a single party: try running as a Tory in Scotland, or a Republican in San Francisco, or a member of the Socialist Party anywhere outside of Burlington, Vermont in the USA. Even when you do vote, the winning candidate's actions will be interpreted by and acted on by an unelected civil service, supervised by a (mostly) unelected judiciary. The ability to those arms of government to override the desires of the voters is of course legendary. If you're a European you've also got a second set of unelected bureaucrats -- appointed, mostly, by national civil servants rather than by elected leaders -- who are quite insulated from democratic accountability. You can of course vote for the European Parliament -- at least, 45% of voters bother to -- which can nicely ask the unelected European Commission to do things -- though it can't actually _make_  them do things.

If you want to have any serious political impact on your community (much less on your nation-state or region) you have to leave civilian life and become a professional career politician - you won't take time off from your job as a lamp maker (like [Hyperbolus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperbolus)) or a tanner (like [Cleon ](http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/121210/Cleon)) to decide matters of war and peace or re-write the laws. In the US the distinction between party "members" and people who check a box on their forms is fuzzy, but in Europe where party membership carries real obligations fewer than 10% of the population are actual party members, and of course only a fraction of these are elected officials.

In that vein, if you really want a new law, you'll have to write a lot of letters to your elected representatives and the newspapers and send a lot of self-righteous tweets. Maybe somebody will listen. Perhaps, if you live in the western US, you can gin up a petition and get your initiative onto a ballot -- after it has been massaged and re-written by civil servants and vetted by the courts. Your Athenian counterpart if (he) was brave enough, could simply stand up and say "I think we should ....." in the Assembly and demand a vote. Technically, he did run the risk of the _graphe paranonon:_ A death-penalty indictment for proposing an illegal law -- but that was a rare case almost never used against anybody who was not a highly divisive partisan figure. If your proposal caught on you could see it enacted then and there. There is nothing even remotely like this in the modern world of sub-sub-sub-committees, informational hearings, think-tanks and C-Span.

TL;DR: Ancient Athenians were __vastly more involved__  in the running of their affairs than we are. Our word "idiot" began life as Greek for "someone who only attends to private affairs and ignores the life of the city." The fraction of the populace that actually counted was higher, not lower than it is today. It was of course less inclusive: but being included in a pantomime without much actual meaning is not necessarily the kind of prize that sets hearts afire with pride or civic fervor.

This doesn't mean that the Athenian system was "better". Besides the obvious issues of inclusion, it also produced a lot of really terrible decision making: endless rounds of tit-for-tat vendettas and intermittent episodes of unpardonable cruelty interspersed with sentimental bouts of remorse (Go read [Thucydides](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0247%3Abook%3D3%3Achapter%3D37) on the [Mytilenian Debate](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mytilenian_Debate) for a bone-chilling example of what "the people" can do when they get a mind to) . In the age of the twitter mob we may be a little more circumspect in our attitudes about the wisdom of the common man than was, say, ["Red Moses" Finley](http://www.amazon.com/Democracy-Ancient-Modern-Lectureship-Series/dp/0813511275). I live in an initiative state where we have some serious administrative problems thanks to the contradictory whims of voters who are happy to endorse property tax caps and expanding school budgets at the same time, so I don't assume that "democracy" is a panacaea.

Still, we live in an era when contempt for the majority of people is becoming fashionable again. If forced to choose, I'd rather give the benefit of the doubt to the man/woman/immigrant/LBGT in the street instead of to their self-appointed betters. That participatory ethic of the Athenians was incredibly powerful: that little chunk of rocky soil, no bigger than Santa Monica and with a smaller population than Milwaukee, humbled the God-kings and stared down the warrior aristocrats of a very brutal world for 300 years, demonstrating very convincingly that ordinary people without the blood of gods or conquerors coursing bluely through their veins did not need to bend a knee to anyone. In the age of gazillionaires, when sniffing about how 'dumb' people are because of their waistlines or TV viewing habits is socially acceptable again, I think thats a valuable lesson worth remembering.

