# Have "holy men" been overrated as an element in late Roman Christian spirituality?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-01-29
	views: 258
	upvotes: 5
	quora url: /Have-holy-men-been-overrated-as-an-element-in-late-Roman-Christian-spirituality/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


If you're thinking about the [Peter Brown](http://www.amazon.com/Society-Holy-Antiquity-Peter-Brown/dp/0520068009) school, I would not say overrated is exactly the right way to put it. 

 The main thrust of Brown's way of looking at Late Antiquity is a correction against the orthodox Gibbon-style "decline and fall" school of looking at the Late Empire. The idea that late imperial society was _different,_  instead of just _worse,_  is a really useful thing to point out, because it underlines how completely the traditional view adopts the point of view of traditional 1st or 2d century elites. Gibbon & co. identify very strongly with worldly, sceptical aristocrats like Cicero or Hadrian. They tend find many important figures of the 4th or 5th century unappealing, and for that reason tend to dismiss as fanatics without attempting to actually understand them. 

In doing that, the Brown school would argue, Gibbonians miss some developments of enormous long-term importance. The big changes in late antiquity are not just theological: they are also social. By trying so hard to jam the rise of independent social voices into an 18th century argument about religious toleration and church privilege cribbed from the French philosophes, the Gibbon school misses or underplays several critical shifts that go on in the late imperial world. It misses the emergence of a kind of populist social power that has no obvious analog in earlier Rome. Those 'holy men', whether holy or not, are the first outsiders to effectively challenge the supremacy of the traditional elites, or perhaps more correctly to challenge it with political and social pressure rather than by force of arms. 

The de-legitimization of the traditional power structure is extremely radical: its not just about people changing their opinions about God, but also about the collapse of all sorts of traditional social authority. The aristocrats may still be rich and still be well read, but they no longer have the kind of social clout to move ordinary people. Instead, outside figures who claim a higher authority can stand up to the traditional elites -- something without many parallels in earlier Roman history, where even the most vicious social struggles tended to involve aristocratic leadership on both sides (Caesar and the Gracchi, for example, had traditional _auctoritas_ in spades). There is certainly no easy counterpart to Bishop Ambrose of Milan excommunicating an emperor and forcing him to do public penance for a massacre. If you can only see theological pettifoggery in the Arian controversy, you miss the way different language groups and ethnicities used it as a forum for what we would clearly see as nationalist politics inside a complex, multi-ethnic empire; you also miss the fact that there's no similar gathering of colleagues and rivals from across the whole empire to deliberate and, if not exactly legislate, then at least to do critical imperial business at any earlier time in the history of the empire. 

Its good stuff for a historian, being too Voltairean to actually engage with it is a waste of great material. It is obviously very hard to write history about that period without getting dragged into controversies about faith, legitimacy and power (even before Gibbon, [Lorenzo Valla](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorenzo_Valla) and the [Donation of Constantine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donation_of_Constantine) were stuck in a similar set of concerns). But even though those stories are important too, they're not the only things that happened in the later empire. The social history of the times can't easily be written without its most characteristic figures whether you believe in their supernatural claims or not. 

Now, all that said -- it's sometimes easy to read bits and pieces from the Brown school as implying that (a) late antiquity was like a big tent revival and everything ran on spiritual charisma or (b) all other cultural concerns were completely submerged in religious enthusiasm. That is an exaggeration in a lot of different ways. There were, as always, plenty of people (both nominally Pagan and nominally Christian) who were indifferent to religious concerns. And the boundary between "outsiders" and "insiders" was a porous one -- a traditional aristocrat could easily end up a bishop (sometimes a devout one, sometimes a political one) and a "holy man" could end up as a political functionary. 

Slightly tangential, for a really interesting fictional look at the whole thing, Iain Pears' [Dream of Scipio](http://www.amazon.com/Dream-Scipio-Iain-Pears-ebook/dp/B001LQYT0O/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1422601019&sr=1-1&keywords=dream+of+scipio&pebp=1422601020755&peasin=B001LQYT0O) is a great read and an interesting meditation on the whole insider-outsider thing.

