# Here are two maps from Wikipedia that depict the Byzantine and Sasanian Empires at their greatest extent. What did it mean to be under the power of an empire?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-06-06
	views: 4274
	upvotes: 28
	quora url: /Here-are-two-maps-from-Wikipedia-that-depict-the-Byzantine-and-Sasanian-Empires-at-their-greatest-extent-What-did-it-mean-to-be-under-the-power-of-an-empire/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Generally speaking, all ancient empires were extremely heterogenous by today's standards: our views of these things are heavily filtered by the 19th and 20th century experience of nationalism, in which the idea that a particular language community or 'race' was the natural unit of governance. Although that's a widespread idea, and one with many adherents even today, it's a historical anomaly: the human norm is for widely different groups with different languages, ethnic backgrounds and religions to be jammed together into political units whose boundaries are mostly based on battlefield success or diplomatic horse-trading.

That might sound kind of bad, and if you were unlucky enough to live directly in the path of an ancient military conquest it _was_  pretty bad. However ancient states -- indeed, most states until the 17th or 18th century in the West, and during long periods of Chinese and Indian history -- were extremely weak by modern standards. Few societies without printing and mechanical transportations could ever hope to the kind of detailed supervision of people's lives that is routine in the modern world.

For example, ancient states did not provide compulsory public schooling: education was a matter for individual families or cities. Roman education was almost entirely private, while Greek states typically had a regulated system of secondary education (for the wealthy members of the citizen class, anyway) but left elementary education up to parents. A common side effect of this is that states lacked the power to impose a common language on their subjects. Many modern states seem like linguistic unities when in fact they are the product of a conscious effort to homogenize and nationalize language: France, for example, the classic 'nation state', spent hundreds of years trying to suppress languages like Breton, Occitan and Catalan, and Bourguignon, particularly once public schooling allowed the state to intervene in children's education.

In ancient empires, by contrast, the state could and did use a particular language for its own purposes but that language did not percolate down to ordinary people very quickly. Imperial languages like Latin, Greek, or Punic did spread, since they represented prestige and the chance for social advancement or economic opportunity: but for the mass of people who didn't have many opportunities to advance themselves, these considerations mattered little: in the countryside old languages hung on tenaciously for centuries. Naturally many people were bilingual, speaking enough of the official language to interact with traders or the tax man while conducting their ordinary lives in their native tongue.

Politically, the states of this period had very high aspirations for governance. Justinian, for example, issued a huge collection of legal reforms intended to standardize the laws across the Empire. However the practical reality was often very different -- the governments had the theoretical right to law down laws but they frequently had very limited resources to actually enforce their edicts. In the countryside, traditional feudal leaders remained important. Even if they had titles which made them -- on paper at least -- creatures of the central government, they relied largely on their own resources to dispense justice and manage local affairs: as long as they didn't rebel, or allow any serious challenges to the central power they would remain the dominant force in rural life. In the cities the administration largely fell on the shoulders of local aristocrats, sometimes being elected to traditional local offices and magistracies and sometimes being "appointed" by the central governments. 

In Byzantine history the back-and-forth struggle between the central government's bureaucracy and the power of rural landowners and urban aristocrats was a constant theme: at different times power was very devolved, with the aristocrats largely running the show and the Empire mostly acting as a trade union and military alliance; at other times the central power was able to dominate the local elites -- sometimes by posing as the protector of the poor and downtrodden against the rich, and sometimes by stressing religious ideals and focusing popular loyalty on the figure of the emperor. The constant fact, though, was that the central government was not able to directly manage local affairs without a lot of cooperation --sometimes enthusiastic, sometimes not -- from cities and feudal magnates in the countryside. Constantinople could, of course, over-awe any individual aristocrat: but it could not afford to alienate all of them. 

In Byzantium, the state tried hard to harness religious orthodoxy as a way of uniting a society which was otherwise multi-lingual, multi-ethnic and full of ambitious local powers. This worked sometimes, but not always: the collapse of the eastern provinces in the age of Arab conquest owed a lot to the resentments of Monophysite and Nestorian Christians who were alienated by Constantinople's efforts to enforce Orthodox doctrines (although it is hard for us to tell, from this distance, when these controversies were really theological and when they were proxies for ambitious local or ethnic power plays). My understanding (which is very not expert!) is that Sassanid Persia -- which inherited the mixed cultural outlook of the Parthians -- was more heterogeneous and less interested in ideological uniformity in this period.

