# How did the Roman culture and thinking, especially in major cities, influence Christian thinking?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-01-25
	views: 1299
	upvotes: 11
	quora url: /How-did-the-Roman-culture-and-thinking-especially-in-major-cities-influence-Christian-thinking/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


To some degree it depends on how strict you want to be about "Roman." There is a lot of interchange between Christian thinkers and several different schools of philosophy in the later empire. 

 The [Neoplatonists](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neoplatonism) evolved a theistic system with a strong focus on mystical union with God, achieved through contemplation. They believed that the _logos_ , or principle of reason, united individuals with the divine and that contemplation could provide a mystical route back to the divine. This tradition had a strong impact on the mystical side of Christianity, and Neoplatonic texts were popular reading through the middle ages; in Eastern Orthodox churches today many terms that originate with the Neoplatonists are also used in theology. However the Neoplatonists were much more strongly rooted in the Greek speaking Eastern Empire, so they might not fit a strict definition of "Roman."

The [Stoics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stoicism) were also a Greek philosophical school, but one which had very broad roots in the Latin west. Stoicism was very compatible with traditional Roman virtues, and became a common philosophy among educated Romans. The Roman version of stoicism emphasized moral behavior as well as control of the emotions; many Stoic maxims and moral reflections were popular with Christians in Roman and later times: Tertullian referred to the Stoic writer [Seneca the Younger](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seneca_the_Younger) as "our Seneca", and many later Christian writers believed he was a secret Christian, based primarily on the congeniality of his writings. Stoics struggled as a school with conflicting feelings about determinism (either natural or supernatural) and human free will, a struggle which was also reflected in the evolution of early Christian doctrine. Stoicism also contained a significant element of asceticism, withdrawing from worldly pleasures in pursuit of a more tranquil life; this jibed well with many Christian concerns, although the ascetic strain in Christianity also has roots in eastern ascetic traditions and not just Roman ones.

The Western church also picked up a good deal of traditional Roman attitudes about order, duty, and public service and the importance of law --in later times important Roman classics (such as the Aeneid or the poems of ) were re-interpreted as examples of 'natural virtue.' The idea of 'natural law' in western theology probably owes something to the Roman idea of the [Jus gentium](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jus_gentium), or 'law of nations', which existed outside of particular jurisdictions as an aspect of human nature; much of the evolution of that concept happens in the middle ages, following the rediscovery of Aristotle in particular (so again, not exactly "Roman") but the old Roman idea of a basic, impersonal moral order in the universe definitely formed part of the emotional backdrop of western Christianity. 

Roman Christians had a complex relationship with the surrounding culture; they were frequently persecuted by the state, even though they generally believed that obedience to the state was an important religious duty; they detested many aspects of Roman civic life (particularly the cruelty of the gladiatorial games, not leastwise because they were frequently on the wrong side of the arena wall) but they were conscious of the achievements of Roman civilization and law in a world that was sliding into anarchy and decay. These tensions find full expression in St. Augustine's _[City of God](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/City_of_God_%28book%29)_ _,_  in which he tries to fit Roman history into a Christian framework - censuring the pagan religion and the crimes of different Emperors, but also respecting the virtue of traditional Roman values such as honesty, duty and self-sacrifice -- arguing, in effect, that Christianity is the perfection of what was best in Roman thought rather than its negation.

