# How come the ancient Greeks and Romans never started a world religion?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-02-10
	views: 473
	upvotes: 9
	quora url: /How-come-the-ancient-Greeks-and-Romans-never-started-a-world-religion/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Greek and Roman religions - at least, the "native" versions that we typically associate with Zeus/Jupiter, etc. -- were focused on concerns that are hard to generalize. Originally they were focused very tightly on local concerns -- the wellbeing of particular cities or lineages, or the _numen_  or "spirit" of particular places such as river or a mountain. The ritual practices and traditions were very tightly woven into the life of their cities and states, but they didn't focus on many of the concerns that "world" religions discuss: the nature of cosmos, morality, or the afterlife. 

Eventually plenty of Greeks and Romans did get interested in what we think of as theological ideas, and many different thinkers attempted to combine reflections on those big topics with the traditional Greco-Roman frameworks; the Stoics and Neo-Platonists, in particular, used traditional Olympian imagery, traditions, and stories in conjunction with cosmological and moral speculations that we'd recognize today as religious. There were also the [mystery religions, ](http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/myst/hd_myst.htm) a mix of native Greek ideas and imports from Asia and Egypt, which addressed the same kinds of cosmic questions - but generally did so in an esoteric, initiates-only way that made them harder to spread (and these were periodically suppressed by the Roman government in particular, which was not keen on groups of people meeting in secret for any reason). 

There was also a countervailing trend, however, which was very pronounced in the later Roman period. Most educated Greeks or Romans were exposed to skeptical and debunking accounts of their own traditions, and also to philosophical traditions that justified the use of religion to keep the masses in line. Skepticism about the traditional religions combined with political expediency to create a lot of very self-conscious efforts at using religious or social control; a trend which began with Alexander the Great adopting the divine trappings of the Persian monarchy and continued through his successors routinely demanding worship as a routine part of ordinary diplomacy. Julius Caesar, Augustus and most Roman emperors were deified (The last words of Vespasian, a jokester throughout his life, were "dear me, I think I'm becoming a god").

Without veering off into the traditional internet arguments about all religions being con jobs, these official efforts to use religion for very transparent political purposes tended to undermine the traditional cults rather than to enhance them. Not only was anybody with a smattering of an education "in on the secret", almost none of the various deified rulers managed to create or maintain the kind of long term stability that would let the the imperial cults would transcend their political origins. Moreover the official cult, like the civic ones it was grafted on to, didn't have a centralized ideology or philosophy that could attract converts or adherents on it's own. 

 It's conceivable that the philosophical / moral side of Greco -Roman religion might have eventually combined with official attempts to create a unifying religion, producing something similar to the state religions of Egypt or Mesopotamia that addressed both spiritual and political needs. However the intellectual atmosphere of later antiquity was very competitive: there were a number of universalizing religions in at play, including not only Christianity but also Judaism and Gnosticism. These all had broad social bases beyond social elite that supported Neoplatonism and Stoicism. They also had more articulated theological and philosophical traditions than the disparate pieces of the classical belief set -- not just cosmic explanations but mores and social structures that created new communities distinct from the traditional civic structures. [Julian the Apostate](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julian_%28emperor%29) tried to create a state religion that could compete with these alternatives, combining traditional forms with Neo-Platonic theology and a strong moral component -- but by that time Christianity was too firmly entrenched to be displaced by a late-comer with no clear constituency.

Of course, many of the philosophical and theological traditions of "high paganism" -- particularly but not exclusively Neo-Platonist theology and Stoic ethics -- ended up informing the outlook of the early Christian church -- in many ways Christianity _is_ the world religion of the Greeks and Romans.

