# How did Italy and Greece become the countries they are today after the fall of the Roman Empire?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-05-23
	views: 4335
	upvotes: 23
	quora url: /How-did-Italy-and-Greece-become-the-countries-they-are-today-after-the-fall-of-the-Roman-Empire/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


I'm a bit late to this party, so I'll defer to the details in the excellent answer from [Stephen Tempest](https://www.quora.com/profile/Stephen-Tempest). The emphasis I'd add is the role of 19th century nationalism and also of the Early Modern literary tradition in the creation of both Italian and Greek national identities.

One of the sad truths of history is that states, empires, and peoples come and go. No matter where you stand you're on top of many layers: past inhabitants, past conquerors, and often institutions which don't match the realities on the ground: life in Brownsville, Texas has at least as much to do with life in Matamoros, Mexico as it does with life in Fargo, North Dakota: but Brownsville and Fargo are both in the same legal and political structure. 
Through most of European history, polyglot and very heterogenous assemblies of people were the norm. The Roman Empire is the most famous example -- even in the "Greek" Byzantine empire, there were something like 100 languages to be heard in the streets of Constantinople, and Rome was if anything more cosmopolitan. Loyalty to an individual leader, to a dynasty, or a shared faith was the bond which kept these heterogenous pieces together. The idea that a 'nation' -- a people with a single language and culture (and implicitly religion) was the natural unit of political organization was a pretty late invention, becoming more and more common in the 18th century and becoming a powerful norm in the 19th (though survivals, like the Austro-Hungarian empire, lasted into the 20th). Modern Greece and modern Italy are products of that 19th century idea: they were created to embody the notion that a "people" -- more or less a language community -- and a state were "natural" units. They way they told their own national histories, tying them to the Greeks and Romans of the past, was strongly influenced by the need to bolster that story.

Part of making nationalism work is finding a shared history on which to base it: you need to show how your nation has a long history and continuity. Both Italy and Greece found that continuity by looking at the records of classical antiquity. In the 19th century, when nationalism was at its height and both modern states were being created (Italy in 1861, Greece in 1821) the cultural prestige of Roman and Greek antiquity was at its height. The Renaissance had made huge quantities of obscure ancient material much more widely available and it was easy to find stirring stories of wisdom, courage and achievement on which to found these new states. 

Italians could actually be credited with inventing the modern idea of the nation: during the Renaissance they became very forcibly aware that their motley political arrangements and feuds left them vulnerable to outsiders: wealthy and culturally prestigious Italian city-states like Florence, Rome and Venice suddenly discovered that big dynastic states like France and Spain could muster bigger, more coherent armies. Machiavelli, for example, vainly endeavored in _The Prince_ to convince the Medici family to lead a unified "Italian" resistance ("Italian" here meaning primarily Italian speakers) to both the Spanish and the French. That cultural solidarity did not turn into effective political action, however: Italy remained a geographical, rather than a political entity until very late: the modern state descends from the Kingdom of Italy, which was essentially invented by an ambitious dynasty (the house of Savoy) who planned to use the nationalist ideal as a propaganda tool. 

 The fact that modern political realities did not exactly line up with the ancient ones was an inconvenient detail. For example, in modern Greece "Macedonia" is a clearly _Greek_  idea: Greeks claim Alexander the Great and his exploits as part of their national story, and they resent the existence of the Macedonian polity on their northern border (insisting that it be known as the _Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia_  -- they even made the Macedonian contingent at the Athens Olympics march under "F" rather than "M") . In antiquity, though, the reality was murkier: Macedonians were a rough-edged frontier people with dubious credentials until they suddenly emerged as a military power. They certainly embraced and extended Greek culture, but they were Hellenized by a long and complex process of assimilation: One reasons the Romans found it so easy to conquer Greece was the resentment that the Greek heartland felt towards their Macedonian overlords. At the same time many (indeed most!) centers of ancient Greek culture -- the cities of Asia Minor and the Black Sea coast, Sicily, Southern Italy and above all Constantinople and Alexandria -- are outside of the modern Greek state. You could imagine some enterprising future polity which includes more of these writing its own history in a way which "proves" that they have always formed a cultural unit and "belong" in the same legal and political framework. 

Italy has many of the same issues: The kingdom of Piedmont, for example, was based in Sardinia and Liguria, not in Rome or Tuscany. The Sardinians and Ligurians were both provincial peoples who became fully Romanized fairly late (even as late as the 14th century, Dante commented that he could not understand Sardinians because they "weren't Italians"). Liguria was part of Gallia Cisalpina -- inhabited by Gauls, as the name implies -- until the boundaries were redrawn by Augustus and the south-eastern half of the modern region was re-assigned to Italia. Meanwhile many Italian speaking territories existed outside the borders of modern Italy: Venice (anciently, home of the Veneti, another non-Roman tribe absorbed into the Empire) had to be conquered to join the new Italian state in 1866, while Italian speaking enclaves in Dalmatia remained under Austro-Hungarian or Ottoman control. Meanwhile there are still Greek-speaking enclaves in southern Italy which date back to Greek colonization from 2500 years ago. 

Today, both countries are facing large scale immigration from the Middle East -- it's not hard to imagine some future version of Greece or Italy telling a national story in which their countries had "always" been part of a "larger Mediterranean world", pointing out how much of Sicily was an Arab Emirate from 832 to 1072 and how Greeks had been an important stratum of the Ottoman Empire. History always provides materials for telling a new story about where you come from.

