# If France wanted to stop the Nazi blitzkrieg, what could they have possibly done?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-05-23
	views: 81359
	upvotes: 592
	quora url: /If-France-wanted-to-stop-the-Nazi-blitzkrieg-what-could-they-have-possibly-done/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


With all due respect to [User-10502113224141057374](https://www.quora.com/profile/User-10502113224141057374), whose answers are always well thought out and interestingly contrarian, the French had a chance. They blew it. 

It wasn't cowardice, or lack of manliness -- but it was also not an inevitable surrender to an unstoppable juggernaught. It was a toxic combination of social fragmentation, poor tactics, and above all an inflexible commitment to a flawed strategy which extended over an entire generation. 

 In the run up to the conflict, the French war effort was hampered by significant political tension at home. Significant numbers of Frenchmen didn't really want to fight: some were simply afraid of a repeat of Verdun, but some took their cue from Stalin and regarded the fight as a mere squabble between decadent capitalists, while others sympathized with Hitler's opposition to the Bolsheviks (and to a lesser degree with hatred for Jews and other assorted foreigners) The "average" Frenchman _was_  willing to fight, but there were enough non-average Frenchmen to hamper the war effort significantly (see [this answer ](https://www.quora.com/Why-was-Germany-able-to-conquer-France-using-Blitzkrieg-tactics-but-failed-to-do-so-for-Russia-during-World-War-II-given-that-both-were-mighty-European-powers-then/answer/Steve-Theodore)for more background on that aspect). 

On the battlefield, the French army was timid. Not in the "cheese eating surrender monkeys" sense: plenty of individuals and units fought bravely and died heroically. The French were committed to a static, passive posture that was precisely the wrong response to German tactics. This was an army whose leadership was not sure would fight, and it was handled clumsily and overcautiously. Static defenses, penny-packet local counterattacks instead of big strokes, and a complete failure to cope with the fast moving German spearhead The Germans had designed their military tactics around precisely the kind of static and inflexible war the French had been preparing to fight since the 1920s and the French were unable to make the right counter-moves, on the battlefield or in the long run-up to the war while both sides were re-arming. 

The French had, truly, suffered enormously in the First World War -- so much so that in the final year of the war they faced mutinies and widespread passive resistance among their front-line troops. The Maginot line was not designed to fight the war of the trenches all over again: it was designed as something behind which a shaky army could fight a safe, defensive battle. The "Racial Hatred" aspect of Anglo-American French baiting has some root in the experiences of 1917 and 1918 when the British and American forces found the French unwilling or unable to press an attack, though still dogged in defense. 

The French commitment to the strategic defensive was not an unreasonable response to the history of World War I. Unfortunately for the French, the Germans learned very different lessons (particularly from the much more mobile battles of 1918, in which the French had taken a back-seat role). They (along with other military theorists such as [Liddell Hart](http://Liddell Hart) in the UK and [Tukhachevsky](http://Tukhachevsky) in the USSR ) saw that the combination of air power and ubiquitous armor spelled the end of fixed-fortification warfare. But the French -- with the tragic history of Verdun behind them, and the fear of an army that would not fight offensively before them -- remained committed to the idea of fighting from fixed positions. They weren't the only ones who made that mistake: the British learned the hard way at Singapore, the Americans at Corregidor, and the Belgians at Eben Emael (nominally "the greatest fortress in history"). Alas for the French they had not staked the security of one or two key positions on this theory: they had bet the future of their nation on it. 

Without that terrible strategic failure, things could have gone very differently. The combined Anglo-French forces in 1940 numbered slightly less than the Germans (the wiki article includes enough Dutch and Belgians to make the numbers very close: 3.3 million vs 3.35; In France proper the real number is maybe 300,000 fewer on the allied side, so call it 3 m vs 3.35 m). That's not an overwhelming disadvantage by most measures, particularly not when fighting on your home ground. The allies were well equipped, with more tanks and guns though fewer aircraft. Both sides has a wide range of quality in this early stage of the war; the edge went to the Germans but both sides were flying biplanes and riding bicycles at this stage as well as sporting Panzers and Spitfires. The Germans were also hampered (as they would be throughout the war) by inadequate support and logistics -- fuel and ammunition shortages plagued their lead units after the breakthrough. They had an institutional blind spot of their own, preferring scary new killing machines to the humbler but essential business of moving food, fuel and ammo.

When the fighting started, German air superiority was very important, but not only for tactical reasons: the horrors of the Spanish civil war had given soldiers and civilians alike an exaggerated fear of what aircraft could do. The already sluggish French movements were hampered by panicky civilian crowds, and intense air attacks had a psychological impact on French troops all out of proportion to their military impact -- culminating in the collapse of the French counterattack at [Second Sedan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Sedan_%281940%29#Race_to_Bulson) in the face of air attacks and mistaken reports of (nonexistent) German tanks.

But even without the Stuka mystique, the French simply could not -- or would not, the distinction is almost arbitrary here -- fight the kind of warfare that might have stopped the Blitz. They committed tanks by twos and threes, not by companies or divisions; the dug in to likely defensive positions and were simply bypassed by fast-moving German units. Above all they didn't move aggressively to seal the growing German salient. It was a fatal combination of equipment designed for static, defensive war (tanks without radios, for example), a doctrine designed for avoiding mistakes instead of exploiting opportunities, and above all a general staff which didn't trust its own army to fight aggressively. Whether they were justified or not in that belief, it absolutely prevented them from taking the countermoves that would have prevented the fall of France -- or at least, turned it from a six-week debacle into a more drawn out and costly battle. 

Rohit is correct that the German plan was a gamble: however it wasn't a stupid one, it was based on a very shrewd assessment of the state of the French military and French society, and particularly on their inability to react to fast-moving forces. There's nothing magical about "blitzkrieg," fast, deep penetration attacks have been part of warfare since people started banging each other on the head with sticks. The traditional countermoves are simple: defense in depth combined with aggressive counterattacks against shoulders of the enemy salient. The French army in the field did the reverse, sticking to linear positions and ceding the initiative to the Germans. A few aggressive commanders in the lower ranks -- like de Gaulle -- did disrupt the German advance by threatening vulnerable supply lines and headquarters units; but they didn't have the tactics or the equipment to push hard and fast when opportunities arose. Meanwhile many French units marched from one easily-flanked defensive line to another, never even seeing the enemies who were bypassing their strongholds, cutting them off from their leadership, and rendering them useless. "There is no strategic reserve" was not the result of attrition: it was a result of French army dispositions intended to fight another 400-mile wide linear war instead of a war of manouver and deep advances.

There are two questions here: were the French "brave enough?" and "could they have done better?" 

 The first question is dubious, if not offensive: many _individual_  French men and women fought bravely and laid down their lives. The French state, on the other hand, proved itself shortsighted, timorous, and incompetent: not merely in 1940 but in the long pre-war years when they refused to face the realities that were emerging on the other side of the Rhine. The French "nation" or "people" or whatever you want to call it is just an abstraction, a way of talking that tries to elide the difference between the brave individuals and decrepit institutions. Talking about "national character" is usually -- let's put this nicely -- an excuse for not thinking very hard about the difference between institutions and people.

The second question really only concerns the second, institutional structure. Despite the valor of individuals, the French army in 1940 fought _terribly_ . The Poles -- outnumbered more than 2 to 1, half their army still assembling in the reserve centers, without a modern airforce, attacked from 3 sides simultaneously -- held out for 5 weeks in 1939. France -- forewarned, fully mobilized, fighting a war they knew was coming from prepared positions alongside powerful allies -- lasted 6. The battlefield failures could have been alleviated with different tactics and more open-eyed leadership, but not within the fatal month and half: they were the result of decades of political division and institutional sclerosis, dating back at least to the 1920s if not before. 

No one can be blamed for wanting to avoid another Verdun; but the political and military institutions of the inter-war years were so fixated on the horrors of the last war that they were unable to first avoid and then to survive the second. It's an intellectual, rather than a moral failure, in the sense that it was a tragic lack of foresight, rather than mere cowardice -- but it was a failure nevertheless and the French paid for it dearly.

