# The Greeks and Hellenized Romans knew the pyramids were ancient, but did they know how ancient? Are there any primary sources from then that try to put an age on the pyramids?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-05-25
	views: 10581
	upvotes: 42
	quora url: /The-Greeks-and-Hellenized-Romans-knew-the-pyramids-were-ancient-but-did-they-know-how-ancient-Are-there-any-primary-sources-from-then-that-try-to-put-an-age-on-the-pyramids/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Herodotus, writing in the 5th C BC, correctly identified Khephren ("Cheops" in Greek tradition) as a pyramid builder (in reality he was not the first - but Herodotus doesn't mention earlier pyramids or mastabas). 
[Manetho](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manetho), an Egyptian priest writing under the Ptolemies, put together a detailed list of kings and dynasties which was pretty good by ancient chronological standards, so any Alexandrian scholar could put two and to together to get a not-totally-insane guess about the dating for the Giza pyramids, at least.

The Greeks in general had a kind of awe for the antiquity of Egyptian culture: there's another story in Herodotus about a Greek traveller, Hecateus of Miletus, bragging to the Egyptians that he was seventeen generations in descent from a god; the Egptians took him to a temple and showed him the statues of 341 past high priests, each a gentleman descended from another gentleman, putting the upstart very firmly in his place.

Herodotus reports a story that the building of the pyramids that has shaped our imagination of working conditions. It's not particularly accurate, according to modern archaeologists, but it's pretty vivid.

Book 2, 124...

> 124. Down to the time when Rhampsinitos was king, they told me there was in Egypt nothing but orderly rule, and Egypt prospered greatly; but after him Cheops became king over them and brought them to every kind of evil: for he shut up all the temples, and having first kept them from sacrificing there, he then bade all the Egyptians work for him. So some were appointed to draw stones from the stone-quarries in the Arabian mountains to the Nile, and others he ordered to receive the stones after they had been carried over the river in boats, and to draw them to those which are called the Libyan mountains; and they worked by a hundred thousand men at a time, for each three months continually. Of this oppression there passed ten years while the causeway was made by which they drew the stones, which causeway they built, and it is a work not much less, as it appears to me, than the pyramid; for the length of it is five furlongs and the breadth ten fathoms and the height, where it is highest, eight fathoms, and it is made of stone smoothed and with figures carved upon it. For this, they said, the ten years were spent, and for the underground chambers on the hill upon which the pyramids stand, which he caused to be made as sepulchral chambers for himself in an island, having conducted thither a channel from the Nile. For the making of the pyramid itself there passed a period of twenty years; and the pyramid is square, each side measuring eight hundred feet, and the height of it is the same. It is built of stone smoothed and fitted together in the most perfect manner, not one of the stones being less than thirty feet in length.
125. This pyramid was made after the manner of steps, which some call "rows" and others "bases": and when they had first made it thus, __they raised the remaining stones with machines made of short pieces of timber,__  raising them first from the ground to the first stage of the steps, and when the stone got up to this it was placed upon another machine standing on the first stage, and so from this it was drawn to the second upon another machine; for as many as were the courses of the steps, so many machines there were also, or perhaps they transferred one and the same machine, made so as easily to be carried, to each stage successively, in order that they might take up the stones; for let it be told in both ways, according as it is reported. __However that may be, the highest parts of it were finished first, and afterwards they proceeded to finish that which came next to them, and lastly they finished the parts of it near the ground and the lowest ranges.__ On the pyramid it is declared in Egyptian writing how much was spent on radishes and onions and leeks for the workmen, and if I rightly remember that which the interpreter said in reading to me this inscription, a sum of one thousand six hundred talents of silver was spent; and if this is so, how much besides is likely to have been __expended upon the iron with which they worked__ , and upon bread and clothing for the workmen, seeing that they were building the works for the time which has been mentioned and were occupied for no small time besides, as I suppose, in the cutting and bringing of the stones and in working at the excavation under the ground?
126. Cheops moreover came, they said, to such a pitch of wickedness, that being in want of money he caused his own daughter to sit in the stews, and ordered her to obtain from those who came a certain amount of money (how much it was they did not tell me); but she not only obtained the sum appointed by her father, but also she formed a design for herself privately to leave behind her a memorial, and she requested each man who came in to her to give her one stone upon her building: and of these stones, they told me, the pyramid was built which stands in front of the great pyramid in the middle of the three, each side being one hundred and fifty feet in length.
127. This Cheops, the Egyptians said, reigned fifty years; and after he was dead his brother Chephren succeeded to the kingdom. This king followed the same manner as the other, both in all the rest and also in that he made a pyramid, not indeed attaining to the measurements of that which was built by the former (this I know, having myself also measured it), and moreover there are no underground chambers beneath nor does a channel come from the Nile flowing to this one as to the other, in which the water coming through a conduit built for it flows round an island within, where they say that Cheops himself is laid: but for a basement he built the first course of Ethiopian stone of divers colours; and this pyramid he made forty feet lower than the other as regards size, building it close to the great pyramid. These stand both upon the same hill, which is about a hundred feet high. And Chephren they said reigned fifty and six years.

