# Was the Byzantine Empire actually byzantine? If so, how?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-06-06
	views: 5667
	upvotes: 64
	quora url: /Was-the-Byzantine-Empire-actually-byzantine-If-so-how/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Because the Byzantines managed to maintain at least a fig-leaf of political continuity for a thousand years, they accumulated lot of of... well, in programming we call it _[cruft](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cruft)_ _:_ the vestigial remnants of things which were no longer really important, but which still formed an important part of the protocol of ruler-ship. A modern example might be the various rules and practices which surround the doings of the British royal family: rules about social precedence, traditional procedure, etc: is Sir Elton John more presentable than the [pretender to the throne of Ethiopia](http://www.ethiopiancrown.org/press.htm)? What topics are safe for the opening of Parliament? What distinguished a "Royal" regiment from the "Queen's Own"? etc. This sort of thing accumulates over time (quite fast, in fact: the ceremonial aura of the US president is pretty complex too, despite a mere two centuries of accretion). When you reflect that the [last Roman emperor](https://www.quora.com/Who-was-the-last-decent-Roman-emperor) still dispensed titles like καῖσαρ (Caesar) 1500 years after Caesar's birth, and νωβελίσσιμος (_nobellisimus: Latin 'Most Noble')_ 1,000 years after Latin was a living language in Byzantium you can get some sense of the scale of the problem.

In the Byzantine context, this was filtered through the centuries long evolution of the imperial bureaucracy as well. The need to for extremely finely gradated distinctions of status and precedence -- combined with an institutional memory stretching back over a millennium -- led to a proliferation of titles, orders, and "offices" with no duties that was at once bewildering and strangely enchanting. Among other things the precedence system had to accommodate (and, importantly, to help diffuse the tensions between) military and bureaucratic power, between the central administration and the provincial nobility, between the state and the church -- and also between the Emperors, who came and went, and the bureaucracy itself which was effectively immortal. The bureucracy was already pretty complex at the beginning of the Byzantine period, as the surviving civil-service gazette known as the _[Notitia Dignitatum](http://legacy.fordham.edu/halsall/source/notitiadignitatum.asp)_ __ shows in the 5th century; by the peak of Byzantine power in the 11th century the lexicon was enormous, convoluted, and weirdly compelling (the [wiki page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byzantine_bureaucracy_and_aristocracy) gives some of the flavor, including separate lists of title and honors for the castrated and the non-castrated).

The other meanings of Byzantine include 'murky', 'deceptive' and 'treacherous' This is perhaps an unkind summary of Byzantine history but not an entirely unfair one: Although Byzantine society and culture persisted for a millenium, individual houses and factions came and went -- sometimes quite violently, and frequently as a result of bizarre alliances and even connivance with outside enemies. Conflicts between the military and civilian wings of the government, between Constantinople and the provinces, and between court factions led to surprising reversals of fortune and betrayals: the career of [Belisarius](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belisarius) -- liberator of Rome from the Goths, savior of Constantinople against the Bulgars, and ultimately a blinded beggar (according to legend, anyway) is a paradigmatic example but not the only one. There are characters like [Leo V the Armenian](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leo_V_the_Armenian), who not only deposed his own emperor but who also tried to assassinate the Czar of Bulgaria during negotiations, going on to double cross his supporters in the Church by embracing [iconoclasm](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byzantine_Iconoclasm) (and "coincidentally" to seize a lot of church property) before being himself assassinated by the [Paulicians](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paulicianism) a sect resembling today's Yezidis. Another good example would be the career of [John VI Kantakouzenos](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_VI_Kantakouzenos#Reign), whose accession ultimately depended on support from the Ottomans. Along the way there were dozens of pleasantries -- former emperors and empresses assassinated, forced into monasteries, or worse mutilated (since custom forbade the deformed from holding power) .

So: the English word is not an _entirely_ fair description of the way things went in Byzantium, but there's a reason the way we use it as we do.

