# Was there an established, permanent bureaucracy in the Roman Republic?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-06-05
	views: 2754
	upvotes: 21
	quora url: /Was-there-an-established-permanent-bureaucracy-in-the-Roman-Republic/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


No, there was nothing like a real permanent civil service in the Republic, or at least there was nothing that shows up in our records. 

In general, the Republic was fiercely devoted to keeping power from accumulating in individual hands: most state functions were exercised by boards or colleges, from the two consuls on down. These were generally not salaried (this was by design: poor people were not eligible anyway, one of the goals of the system was to keep power in the hands of the well -to-do. These groups rotated in and out regularly, usually on an annual basis; they could be elective or appointive, with the top-tier jobs always being elected but special purpose boards sometimes appointed by magistrates. The main exception to the regular rotation was priesthoods, which were usually lifetime tenures. Some of these colleges, particularly the [Augurs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Augur), did have fairly high profile responsibilities, since they had effective veto power of many civic functions. 

Outside the city itself, current and former magistrates acted as provincial governors or held special commands: a former consul would govern as a [Proconsul](http://www.livius.org/concept/proconsul/), a former praetor as a [Propraetor](http://www.livius.org/concept/propraetor/), and so on. These commands were granted by the Senate, usually for an annual term but they could be extended indefinitely under unusual circumstances (to keep a key general in an important theater, for example, or to keep someone with extensive diplomatic contacts in a sensitive area). These posts were not paid, although the state covered some expenses. One unfortunate side effect of this was that late Republican governors were famously rapacious, using their offices to amass wealth they could use to enhance their political careers back home. The case of [Verres](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verres) is a notorious, but hardly unusual example.
 
Some measure of continuity was provided by the Senate itself, since the different magistrates got advice and directives from the Senate (which was mostly made up of former officeholders, so the Senators generally knew both the law and the precedents concerning different practical problems). Senate membership was lifelong (at least if you did not get evicted for falling below the property qualification, or booted by the [Censors](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_censor) in charge of maintaining decorum) so the Senate did have a lot of institutional knowledge. Technically, however, the Senate was purely advisory: individual Senators were not acting magistrates unless they happened to be holding office.

In Greece, publicly owned slaves often did long-service jobs for the city; the famous example being the Scythian archers who acted as a kind of p0lice force in Athens. In Rome the early civic fire brigades were organized the same way. The evidence for public slaves doing higher level work of the sort we'd associate with "civil servants" (the wording is kind of suggestive) is not clear in the Republican period. 

Individuals definitely entrusted slaves with very high-level administrative tasks, both in their businesses and in political life. Cicero's relationship with [Tiro](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Tullius_Tiro), who was his slave but also his most important aide, is not uncommon in the Republican period. However since magistrates cycled through different offices annually, their slaves would be no more likely to hold 'permanent' power than they were; I'm not aware of any examples of "public" slaves who did similar high level jobs for long stretches, though it's not inconceivable that jobs where continuity of experience mattered would have evolved something similar on the analogy of the way private enterprises of the time behaved.

Under the empire important administrative tasks fell onto the imperial household: Augustus, for example, recruited a mixture of Senators and equestrians to oversee the administration of the provinces he ran directly, but these political appointees oversaw a corp of slaves and freedmen who were part of his personal _familia_ , which of course include hundreds or even thousands. This was not exactly the same thing as a modern civil service where political appointees dealt with long-service, non-political functionaries but it probably worked in a similar manner. Under later emperors, highly placed imperial slaves or freedmen became extremely powerful, such as [Narcissus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiberius_Claudius_Narcissus) under Claudius and [Pallas](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pallas_(freedman)) under Nero -- two examples that show that being nominally a slave and commanding great power were not contradictory, at least by the 1st century.

