# Was capital punishment in ancient law used mostly as a deterrent?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-01-15
	views: 782
	upvotes: 4
	quora url: /Was-capital-punishment-in-ancient-law-used-mostly-as-a-deterrent/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


It's a very broad category, with lots of different nuances for different particular societies. Here are some considerations that applied to some degree or another in many societies, but the combinations and details will be quite different from place to place.

__Word of mouth__ . I'd separate this from 'deterrence' as a concept. Grisly, public executions and punishments were not merely intended to influence the calculus of a potential criminal; they also informed society as a whole of the power and reach of the authorities. Memorable methods of execution were useful less for their deterrent value and more for propaganda value: in a largely illiterate society with no mass media, a head on a stake or a drawing-and-quartering would generate a lot of word-of-mouth among the onlookers. Many of the most infamous punishments are clearly designed to be showy, rather than to maximize the suffering of the victims; the main incentive for that theatricality is to ensure a lot of second hand discussion. It may be deterrent as well, but it's more like the propaganda effect of the old Soviet military parades: equal parts boasting and intimidation. That's why the bones of pirates are displayed on a gibbet at the edge of the harbor, or the survivor's of Spartacus are crucified along all the major highways of Italy -- to remind everyone (and not just potential malefactors) who's boss.

__Appearances__ . Related to the previous one, most ancient states had extremely limited resources for law enforcement. The modern 'police force' is a 19th century invention; while most older societies had some kind of law enforcement regime, very few had anything most of us would recognize as beat cops or as detectives: the main jobs were riot control, firefighting (the "night watch" was often a hybrid fire-fighting/police department) and guarding sensitive areas like the city gates or the palace. Terrifyingly draconian codes were a way of eking out the very limited power of the state, both by deterring criminals and also be creating the _appearance_  of doing something: it's very common to find 'new' laws loudly announcing the death penalty for old offenses that were already illegal, just as a way of proving that the state was doing something. This is particularly true for offenses that bothered the rich and powerful, like poaching or highway robbery. 

__Cost.__  In poorer times, the cost of keeping and feeding prisoners was significant. When much of the population lives on the edge of starvation, the idea of paying to keep a criminal housed and fed for long periods seemed unusual, or even perverse. Long term incarceration is an unusual penalty, historically it was quite rare: in the European world it did not become a standard punishment for serious crimes until the 18th century. The main alternative was penal servitude: "condemning a prisoner to the galleys", as in _Ben Hur_  (this was effectively a death sentence in many cases anyway, since penal slavery was often hard labor in dangerous conditions, such as the infamous galleys or the mines of [Laurium](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laurium)).


__Ritual__ . In some societies, killing an offender was regarded as a duty. This might be justified as restoring a natural balance that was upset by an evil action. In many cultures the line between criminal punishment and human sacrifice was fuzzy -- if there was an ongoing tradition of human sacrifice, criminals could be a socially acceptable source of victims. Some scholars think that gladiatorial games had their ultimate origin in sacrifices, and we know that they were sometimes used as a sentencing tool. It's never easy to know how literally people took the ritual justifications -- one assumes a good deal of variation -- but this element definitely mattered in many contexts. 

__Blood guilt.__ Related to the notion of ritual, many societies believed in "blood debts" -- the idea that different social or kin groups had to avenge insults or injuries done to their members. This poses a tricky problem for states, since cycles of revenge have a way of spilling out of control: a single bar brawl may create a multi-generational cycle of feuds and violence. Capital punishment is way of emphatically underlining the authority of the state over violence -- if your brother is killed, we will execute his murderer, but if you kill the murderer's uncle we will do the same to you. Especially given the limited use of incarceration, the need for a public and highly visible, but de-personalized and 'vengeance-proof' form of retribution was very important for preventing clan warfare.

 

__Negotiability__ . Last, but probably the most important consideration. Although many ancient law codes -- and even very recent ones, like those of Georgian England -- sound incredibly harsh to modern ears, few ancient societies operated with the mechanical regularity of modern states. Even convicted offenders could be pardoned by a judge, a local notable, or a higher authority such as the king or bishop. To take a recent example, England passed a huge number of capital offenses in the 18th century, but without a corresponding increase in executions -- instead, many offenders were convicted and then pardoned by local authorities. For many first time criminals this was effectively 'getting off with a warning', while it earned good will for the local squire or magistrate who issued the pardon. The pardoned criminal might be a more willing 'volunteer' for the army or simply decide to move on to a new home, providing a cheap alternative to actual execution or incarceration. In the English case, this tended to decline as 'transportation' -- exile to Australia or other colonies -- became an alternative to incarceration and execution. In many historical jurisdictions there was a lively trade in pardons, particularly if the offenders had family groups or patrons who would intercede on their behalf. This had the paradoxical effect of pulling society closer together as favors were traded and lives spared; while not a very modern way of dealing impartial justice this is a very common feature of traditional societies.

