# Were Roman citizens allowed to bear arms?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-03-15
	views: 10822
	upvotes: 56
	quora url: /Were-Roman-citizens-allowed-to-bear-arms/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


This actually varied considerably over time: circumstances changed and laws with them. In Republican and early imperial times there was also a complex patchwork of local and Roman laws, so the picture is even more complex. Plus, the transition from Republic to Empire took place against a backdrop of intermittent civil wars that lasted more than a century, in which all constraints against civil violence were discarded.

One of the persistent dividing lines was the distinction between "city" life and life in the country. Both Greek and Roman cities had pretty strong social taboos against civilians walking around openly armed in public: this was considered a 'barbarian' trait which civilized people disdained. Even mob violence was usually conducted with improvised clubs and paving stones rather than swords and spears. During the [Catilinarian conspiracy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second_Catilinarian_conspiracy), the would-be revolutionaries were found to be stockpiling weapons to distribute to the proletarians, which suggests that they could not rely on an armed populace. This wasn't absolute, however: the difference between a "knife" -- possession of which would have been universal -- and a "dagger" or other weapon is of course a fuzzy one. The results however could be quite similar, as Caesar found out the hard way. 

On the other hand, hunting was common and the countryside was often dangerous: even at its height, Rome did not maintain a "police presence" of the kind we'd recognize (see [How bad was crime in ancient Rome?](https://www.quora.com/How-bad-was-crime-in-ancient-Rome)) so travelers, particularly in poorer or more remote areas, had to take care of themselves. Particularly before Pompey's anti-pirate campaigns, merchant ships went armed as a matter of course. In emergencies, wealthy people often managed to arm military units on their own from local resources : Pompey, for example, managed to produce 3 complete legions for the war between Marius and Sulla, which suggests that many of his (rural) clients already owned their own weaponry. Cicero, likewise, encouraged the manufacture of weapons for pro-Republican civilians during his effort to unseat Marc Anthony and restore the Republic. Of course, both of these examples are the result of unsettled times where extra-legal maneuvers were common.

The city/country distinction carries through in the laws. There were strong legal prohibitions against _carrying_ arms inside the city proper. We don't know much about _ownership,_ on the other hand. The situation was much more complex outside the City: for most of this period, cities other than Rome had pretty wide leeway in local governance so there was a lot of local variance, and in any case enforcement of these kinds of matters was primarily a local issue. There were several laws passed against selling weapons to 'barbarians', though these were passed often enough that it appears they were violated often. Interestingly, in the later Empire the most stringent prohibitions were against the sale of _armor_ , rather than weapons (the technology for a good suit of armor was more complex and easily controlled, and the Romans worked hard to preserve their superiority in heavy infantry). 

The upper classes of Greek and Roman cities were, at least before the age of Marius and Sulla, the core of the army -- in most places and times, the ability to provide your own arms and armor was the mark of a first-class citizen; the [The Servian system](http://ancienthistory.about.com/od/romemilitary/qt/052311-The-Servian-Reforms-of-the-Roman-Army.htm) in the early Republic explicitly tied social rank and voting rights to the kind of equipment , and similar systems existed in many city states before the age of Alexander. 

In the age of bigger empires -- where many cities were occupied by foreign powers and where militia-based armies gave way to professional forces -- the connection between arms-bearing and citizenship was much weaker and eventually disappeared. After the [Marian reforms](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marian_reforms), the state provided the arms and equipment for soldiers (this will have of course changed the domestic arms market a lot). By the end of the Principate, the aristocracy was pretty much divorced from actual military duties. 

After Diocletian, the state assumed much direct control over the manufacture of weapons and armor (the [Notitia Dignitatum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Notitia_Dignitatum) mentions _fabricae_ or 'factories' for arms and armor under state control). However as the Empire's borders weakened and security grew more tenuous, many big landowners started maintaining private armies of armed guards and retainers: the fore-runners of the feudal system.

