# What kind of connection was between religion and politics in Byzantine Empire? And how significant was its influence on other orthodox countries such as Russia, Bulgaria etc.?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-10-14
	views: 977
	upvotes: 7
	quora url: /What-kind-of-connection-was-between-religion-and-politics-in-Byzantine-Empire-And-how-significant-was-its-influence-on-other-orthodox-countries-such-as-Russia-Bulgaria-etc/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


One of the biggest historical differences between Roman Catholic and Orthodox church history is the role of the state. 

In the west, where the Roman state basically dissolved, the Church enjoyed considerable independence -- in fact, since most of the political actors in the west were small and many of the states rose and fell, the Church acquired a lot of political power, by virtue of its long institutional memory and social welfare infrastructure. 

 In the east, on the other hand, the church was much more closely associated with the imperial government, which of course never disappeared. This meant that the emperors were effectively the heads of the church in much the same way that post-reformation kings in Northern Europe were. The usual term for this is [Caesaropapism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caesaropapism), a term which usually is taken to mean the subordination of the church to "secular" political authority (secular in quotes because the theoretical justification is that the emperor rules as God's anointed representative). Ib Byzantium, the emperor appointed the Patriarch (the head of the Orthodox church in the east), summoned and "presided over" church councils -- which could mean acting as a kind of figurehead (the way the Queen of England opens Parliament) or could mean essentially dictating church doctrine.

Needless to say, Caesaropapism is an attractive idea if you are an emperor -- and less so if you are a churchman. Over the course of Orthodox history the degree to which individual rulers could dictate church decisions varied a great deal: some emperors were active theologians, issuing doctrinal pronouncements on their own authority, others were content to appoint Patriarchs and allow the church to run its own affairs, and others where deeply influenced by elements within the church. More than a few high churchmen suffered for failing to follow the emperor's lead: [Constans II](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constans_II) condemned [Pope Martin I](https://oca.org/saints/lives/2008/04/14/101075-st-martin-the-confessor-the-pope-of-rome) to exile and had [St Maximus the Confessor](http://oca.org/saints/lives/2015/01/21/100249-st-maximus-the-confessor) killed for resisting his religious dictates. Overall both sides accepted the idea that the emperor was the highest power in church affairs -- but exactly what that was supposed to mean in practice was often highly controversial. 

 And, of course, the support of ordinary people mattered a great deal: some emperors fell afoul of popular sentiment by pursuing theological ideas that the population didn't like ([Basiliscus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basiliscus), for example, lost his throne in part because he backed an unpopular faction in the church). In a world where there were few legitimate secular political channels for popular opinion, dissatisfaction with the emperor (or the empire) often expressed itself in religious, rather than political terms. The prime example of this was the serious divisions the church which occurred in the 4th through the 7th centuries. The main theological issues were centered on[ conflicting ways of explaining the nature of Christ](http://www.britannica.com/topic/Christology) -- God/Man? God and Man? God impersonating Man? and so on -- but they were also proxies for political and ethnic tension inside the empire. The three big ideological divisions that emerged from this period -- Orthodoxy, the [Nestorian Church ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_of_the_East)in Syria and farther east, and the [Miaphysite](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monophysitism) churches of Egypt, Armenia, Ethiopia -- each ended up mapping onto different ethnic and linguistic groupings in the east-Roman world. This has dire practical consquences: the Muslim conquest of Egypt owed a great deal to the resentments of Miaphysite Egyptians towards Orthodox Byzantium.

The emperors generally recognized that these highly technical (and generally, to us, incomprehensible) disputes were also a threat to the political and cultural unity of the empire. The biggest cause of state intervention in religious affairs was the efforts of various emperors to force a one-size-fits-all solution onto the empire (the Byzantines inherited the pre-Christian Roman tradition that didn't care too much what you believed in your heart so long as you did what you were told: and if you didn't... well, it wasn't good). Sometimes emperors used state power to back the dominant Orthodox view, but other times they tried to legislate theological compromises that none of the parties accepted, or (like Basiliscus) attempted to impose an unpopular minority doctrine. In all cases they ran into a pretty fundamental problem: even at its height the Byzantine empire did not have the coercive power -- or the media might -- of a modern state: at any given moment the emperors could dictate whatever they pleased, but over the long hauls social pressure tended to force them to into line. It was, in an odd way, the most democratic aspect of the Byzantine heritage.

This pattern tended to replicate itself in the larger Orthodox world, in large part because the basic dynamic -- the three way tug of war between emperors, the church hierarchy, and society as a whole --was not one that could ever be completely resolved. As long as the state takes responsibility for the church it ends up trying to drive church doctrine for its own ends -- and political opposition to the state frequently ends up finding a religious justification. You can see the same basic dilemma facing [Bulgarian Tsars](http://Bulgarian Tsars) in the 12th and 13th centuries as they try to simultaneously embrace and also steer their church in the Byzantine manner. Eventually [Peter the Great](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_reform_of_Peter_the_Great) accomplished the only truly 'complete' example of Caesaropapism when he reduced the Russian Orthodox Church to what was basically just another government department -- although even then the Russian Church regained considerable autonomy in 1905, only to lose it again under Communism and then regain it once more in the 1990's.

