# What are some specific examples of the Greek learning lost (books, subjects) between AD 150 and 550? E.g., would an educated man in 550 still know how to do Euclidean geometry?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-06-01
	views: 2414
	upvotes: 29
	quora url: /What-are-some-specific-examples-of-the-Greek-learning-lost-books-subjects-between-AD-150-and-550-E-g-would-an-educated-man-in-550-still-know-how-to-do-Euclidean-geometry/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


If we've actually got the content -- Euclid is a good example -- it wasn't really lost.

Anything which ended up being re-published in the West after the Renaissance was preserved _somewhere,_ which means it was not lost. It's highly unlikely that anything which survived until the invention of printing was completely forgotten, because of the way manuscript transmission worked. The Latin speaking world did lose access to a lot of Greek material as Greek literacy in the West declined; it never entirely disappeared but it definitely became quite scarce. Many works were however still available in Latin translations or frequently in abstracts (Euclid, for example, was partially preserved in Latin by [Boethius](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boethius) in the early 6th century, although _that_ work is lost).

There are, of course, thousands of references to lost works but we generally don't have very good ideas of when they disappeared, because ancient books were not mass produced and were expensive to copy -- when a manuscript existed in only a few dozen copies, scattered around the Roman world in an unsystematic way it did not take too many accidents of history to erase it forever. Dramatic losses like the burning of a library were rare: but water damage, fires, mold, rats and simple carelessness took a terrible toll; the only real way for a manuscript to survive was to be sufficiently useful that it was continuously re-copied. So, anything which made its way to us -- particularly if it survived the impoverished, book-poor years from the 5th to the 11th centuries -- was circulating somewhere, being copied, recopied and taught to someone. The books that didn't circulate that way are gone: well over 90% of the written output of the ancient world. But much of the kind of information we assume was 'lost' was never written down -- or never circulated at any rate.

It's easy for us to assume that books were the default repository of _technical_  knowledge (this is the subtext to many wide-eyed Quora questions about the [Library of Alexandria](https://www.quora.com/Which-ancient-librarys-destruction-represents-the-greater-historical-loss-between-Alexandria-and-Baghdad), for example). In fact, many subjects were insufficiently genteel to make it into the rarefied world of the libraries: in a world where only cultured gentlemen are the prime consumers of books, books tend to revolve around the concerns of the gentry. There certainly were many important scientific works (in mathematics, medicine and natural history particularly) which did form a part of the genteel literary tradition; but much -- probably most -- technical subject matter never did. Unless somebody found a way to cast technical subject matter into the kind of literary format that would end up in the libraries and collections of the upper classes, technological material was not circulated publicly or deliberately kept secret. There were no patents or intellectual property laws in antiquity, so if your guild or family knew something know one else did, you would work hard to keep that knowledge from getting out.

The net result is we have a very uneven sampling of what ancient people really knew: huge areas of practical life don't make it into our sources. We know a huge amount about, for example, Athenian dramatists of the 5th C BC because later Greek scholars, considering these to be the fountainhead of Greek literary style, worked hard to preserve every scrap they could find. On the other hand we have precisely zero literary evidence for how a Roman sailing ship was rigged, or how the very sophisticated Roman glass works operated, or the construction of a Roman water mill: these sorts of things were for grubby tradespeople and not for the literati. That didn't mean these things didn't exist and develop -- but they did so in ways that leave little or no trace in the written records which shape our understandings.

The secretive world of the guilds, tradespeople and technicians was not, alas, very resilient in the face of the different crises which affected the late Roman world: Population decline, economic collapse and chronic political instability all threatened the delicate, secretive transmission of knowledge: many valuable skills were lost because their possessors died without passing them on, others because the market for them dried up, and others because the networks of trade and supply on which the arts depended were disrupted.

The losses, of course, were far more severe in the Roman West than in the East: the rupture in the Latin speaking parts of the empire was far more complete while most of the fabric of urban life remained in the eastern Empire. As is well known many of these traditions survived in both Byzantium and the Arab world while being lost in the West -- the whole reason that so many Greek works re-emerged in Europe through Arab Spain or Sicily is because the Mediterranean world retains a connection (albeit a tenuous one) with Greek learning.

TLDR: its possible to roughly spot the disappearances of individual manuscripts, but much harder to know when ideas or practices really went out of circulation. Certainly in the time period of the question the losses were nothing like total: the real rupture in continuity was just getting under way as the western empire collapsed; and even then places like Ravenna and Naples remained in close contact with the diminished but more vibrant literary tradition of the Greek east.

