# What were the political parties during the Roman Republic? And what were they like as compared to modern day parties?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-02-11
	views: 10686
	upvotes: 20
	quora url: /What-were-the-political-parties-during-the-Roman-Republic-And-what-were-they-like-as-compared-to-modern-day-parties/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


The basic _Optimates / Populares_  split is covered well in other answers. I'd just expand a bit to say that these were only vaguely related to a modern political party of any stripe. 

There was also a third grouping which didn't exactly constitute a party, but was definitely distinct from the first two. The _Equites_  were basically, the upper middle class, particularly those who had chosen to pursue business instead of the traditional aristocratic path of politics. They were not famous enough or wealthy enough to compete in politics on their own but valuable allies because of their financial resources. They generally looked out for their own interests, opposing populist legislation that could endanger their property, but also opposing the aristocratic tendency to centralize power in the Senatorial order -- they were particularly keen to protect their right to serve as _judices_ (jurors) which the most reactionary nobles wanted to keep to themselves. By instinct they were suspicious of military adventurers (Marius, Sulla, Pompey and Caesar) -- however they were also canny enough to bargain for their support. [Marcus Licinius Crassus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Licinius_Crassus) was their most powerful public face, but Cicero also built his career on their support. 

All three groupings were not political parties as much as shifting groups of alliances among smaller groups of wealthy and powerful people. The primary method of mobilizing political support in Rome was _clientela_ , the relationship between wealthy, influential patrons and poorer but free dependents. It's a murky idea -- some aspects are like the noblesse-oblige in _Downton Abbey,_ while others are more reminiscent of the way a drug lord or Mafia kingpin makes sure to keep his neighbors "happy" -- which can be through charity and patronage or through brass knuckles. The big factions -- the _populares_  and _optimates_  -- were collections of client-groups, rather than individuals; if a patron switched sides, the bulk of his clientele would too. 

This made the whole system behave in very paradoxical ways: while we usually put it in modern terms : rich vs poor, aristocrats vs commons, or conservatives vs progressives, we constantly see Roman elections producing bizarre split votes: the election of Caesar and [Bibulus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Calpurnius_Bibulus) to the consulate in the same year, for example, or the side-by-side election of Crassus and Pompey, who hated each other. It's much easier to understand if you remember that the patronage networks controls most votes, and individual patrons were often themselves caught up in the patronage of more important figures. So, you might repay a favor to a patron by bringing your clients to support a candidate for praetor, but cut a deal with another to support a candidate from the other camp for aedile at the same time. The horse-trading aspects tended to dominate the factional ones. In some ways it was like big-city machine politics in 19th and early 20th century America: the deals among the bosses had at least as much, if not more influence on elections than popular sentiment.

A lot of patron-client relationships were basically hereditary -- my family has always voted with the Metelli -- while others were formed for mutual advantage (as a good example of how fluid this is, [Gaius Marius](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Marius), the most important _popularis_ apart from Caesar_,_  started his career as a client of [Metellus Numidicus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quintus_Caecilius_Metellus_Numidicus), the most prominent optimate of his day: the Marii were hereditary clients of the Metelli, but eventually Marius chased Metellus out of Italy).

Another big source of clients was the military. Successful commanders were expected to look after their veterans, both directly by charity and by sponsoring veterans benefits, land distributions, and other public rewards. This was a key source of political instability in the late Republic, since the lines between supporting your old commander with your votes and supporting him with your fists got blurrier and blurrier.

There were also regional and class loyalties at play; non-Roman Italians worked with amenable Romans to safeguard their interests before the extension of citizenship starting in 90 BC. Those relationships often lasted longer; Pompey, for example, was from Picenum - an Italian town that had stayed loyal to Rome during the conflict over Italian citizenship - and many of his compatriots were loyal clients.

So the summary version: while there were definitely two general groupings (three, if you count the Equites who could back either side in defense of their own interests), only the hard core of each was motivated by what we'd recognize as political partisanship or ideology. The bulk of the electorate was managed through a complex variety of deals and obligations between clients and patrons. Most political loyalties were fluid. Cicero started out as a reformist, and ended up an arch-conservative; his arch-enemy [Catiline](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catiline), for died attempting to foment a populist rebellion, but he he had earlier betrayed several friends and relations -- including his own brother-in-law -- to Sulla's reactionary reign of terror. Pompey was the bane of conservatives early in his reign, but ended up leading the fight against Caesar.

