# What would your country do if the rest of the world went back in time to the 1500s?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-04-10
	views: 1655
	upvotes: 16
	quora url: /What-would-your-country-do-if-the-rest-of-the-world-went-back-in-time-to-the-1500s/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Dealing with the collapse of our economy as we are cut off from the global system on which we depend would of course be the main headache. 
Restructuring our lifestyle to live within our means would be traumatic: almost everybody in contemporary America is intertwined in a complex global system and the ripple effects of tearing that up would make the Great Depression seem like an all-expense paid trip to Disneyland. Raw materials and energy production are probably manageable: while our access to foreign sources of energy and raw materials will disappear overnight, so will much of our need for them: we currently produce about 60 % of our own fuel, and we won't be spending a lot on flights to Europe or importing Toyotas from the Shogun. 

The real problem will be figuring out what to do with people: millions of folks will find themselves out of work, because their livelihoods depend in whole or in part on international systems that have vaporized. There will be some swapping -- if you used to analyse mortgages for Credit Suisse you can do it for an American bank instead -- but there if your job used to involve buying from, selling to, or providing services for other countries you're suddenly irrelevant. It will take years to reorganize the economy around a continental, rather than a global model, with a lot of acrimony, big winners and big losers. 

With strained resources and habits that are poorly adapted to our newly straitened circumstances, we'll also have to cope with other kinds of surprises. Diseases that have died out in our world will be around and kicking, and those of without immunity will have a lot of adjusting to do. We will also have to watch as millions of innocents suffer from our bacterial and viral imports: we'll have the same kind of impact on the global biosphere that Columbus did, rendered all the more heartbreaking because we'll know what's happening but -- with a shattered economy and a lot of domestic unhappiness -- we'll be unable to stop it.

History will repeat itself in another way too. One of the scariest things about having a lot of unhappy 21st century people in a world of 15th century people is that angry, desperate or ambitious folks with 21st century knowledge and tools can do a lot of unpleasant things. Pizarro conquered the Incas with a few hundred muskets; freelance outfits like the Dutch and British East India Companies routinely deposed local rulers and took what they wanted with only marginal advantages in technology and tactics. In a 15th century world, adventurers and idealists with modern communications, transport, and and weapons would have fan out over the globe creating little empires and remaking the world in their own images. 

The justifications for these adventures will be many, varied, and contradictory. The gangsters and Cecil Rhodes's will do what they want because they can; but what will be more fascinating (if depressing) is the way in which a whiff of omnipotence will empower everybody with an axe to grind. Somebody will sail out to sink Columbus of the Azores (it'll be at least 8 years too late, but historical accuracy isn't our strong point in the 21st century: somebody will try it anyway!) Somebody will try to assassinate Martin Luther and prevent the Reformation -- and if that doesn't pan out somebody else will mount an Entebbe-style commando raid to rescue Galileo. [Astoria, Queens](http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/queens/new-wave-greeks-flocking-astoria-article-1.1328443) will send an expedition to liberate Constantinople from the Turks; South Boston will drive the Tudors out of Ireland. 

But it won't just be old grudges that count: many will catch the first boat out of modernity to find a place for their Utopian fantasies without quite admitting to themselves how much of their plans depend on petroleum, penicillin, and a few cases of hollow-point rounds rather than intellectual superiority. Some of these will be try to create a new world peacefully and respectfully; others will end up as ideological concentration camps for their founders or the folks unlucky enough to live nearby. For good or ill, though, they'll have at least a generation (and probably several) of doing more or less what they want: which, as Justin Beiber can tell you is rarely good for the soul. 

 Even for those who stay at home, "Doing it right" without that pesky modern world getting in the way will be a terrible temptation, made worse by fact that the official government -- busy coping, lets remember, with massive unemployment and social unrest -- will deplore these kinds of things without having spare energy to stop them. As the economy stabilizes, though, politics will increasingly start to turn on when, where and how to tell the "natives" to behave. 

The fault lines are hard to predict: we might decide to side with the Aztecs and shove religious tolerance and gay rights down the throats of the Spaniards at gunpoint, although the spectacle of a real-live mass human sacrifice on TV might have unpredictable effects on public opinion. Every injustice in a world that to us will seem horribly violent, racist, sexist, homophobic, anti-democratic and generally benighted will suddenly become Our Business, because we'll have the power to right any wrong that offends us enough. And, of course, the wrongness of the wrongs might just happen to line up with things like commodity prices or electoral politics in swing states. The [Prime Directive](http://Prime Directive) will play the same role in our discourse then that civility and non-partisan pragmatism do today: nobody will do it, but everybody will talk about it. 

 In fifty years there won't be a ruler on Earth who isn't working for us at one or two removes -- except for the diehards in mountains, jungles and deserts plotting our downfall. 

That'll take another fifty years.

After all, our 15th century friends are just as smart and ruthless as we are: they'll steal our tricks, learn how to play us off against each other, and manipulate our delicate modern sensitivities. They won't exactly conquer us -- unless we're utterly stupid or somebody gives the H-Bomb to the Aztecs, which I suppose is about the only way to top giving it to Stalin. But they'll quickly learn how to negate our advantages in technology and the limitations of our psychology. They'll rapidly figure out how to tie us down, force us to deal with them more or less as equals, and live up to our bullshit justifications and pronouncements. What contemporary American politician from the usual round of Sunday morning talk shows, is literally going to out-Machiavelli the actual Machiavelli? To say nothing of [Cardinal Richelieu](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardinal_Richelieu), [Suleiman the Magnificent](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suleiman_the_Magnificent), [Tokugawa Ieyasu](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tokugawa_Ieyasu), or [Babur](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Babur)?

In short, back to square one in a century or so. 

Except that we'll go down in history as the worst people ever. We might actually be them -- having been omnipotent for a while, we might... 'overreact'? ... when our dominance starts to fade. Omnipotence does not breed responsible behavior. But probably not, unless our hegemony drags on too long: by 16th century standards we tend to be pretty nice, on the whole, if rather disreputable and ill-bred. Even so, we will still get a lousy rep: driving around in our fancy cars while they walked behind water buffalos and sending each other meme gifs while they starved or died of preventable diseases -- not to mention devaluing their cultures and re-making their destinies with our arrogance and unshakable sense of our own righteousness -- isn't going to make us popular.

