# What are some disappointing facts about the Ancient Greek civilization?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-11-28
	views: 29127
	upvotes: 221
	quora url: /What-are-some-disappointing-facts-about-the-Ancient-Greek-civilization/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Any culture has its failings and the Greeks had some very serious blind spots.

__Slavery__ . Almost all ancient civilizations practiced slavery, and the Greeks were no exception. Despite their reputation as critical thinkers and rationalists,though, the Greeks never really practiced much introspection on the subject: even systematic philosophers like Aristotle, so sensitive to the nuances of political thought, casually associated slavery with 'barbarism' (that is, with not being Greek) and didn't even expend a lot of thought on justifying the institution: it seemed so natural and obvious to them that it required no rational foundation. Plato was himself [briefly sold into slavery](https://www.quora.com/Did-Plato-s-personal-experience-of-slavery-affect-his-views-on-the-institution), but even that experience did not seem to force him to confront slavery as an institution. In the long history of Greek political experimentation includes only a handful of open attacks on slavery: opinion is divided on whether [the 'City of the Sun'](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eumenes_III) was an egalitarian utopia or merely the not-uncommon trick of arming slaves during a military emergency -- but otherwise ancient Greece produced very little in the way of opposition to slavery: the first outright condemnation of the institution of slavery itself in Greek didn't come until St. Gregory of Nyssa, writing in the 4th century -- seven centuries after the "Golden Age" of Athenian democracy.

Connected with the universality of slavery was a lack of attention to and respect for the actual business of making a living. The ideal Greek life was that of the gentry: only by living off of rents and family property, with all the work done by slaves, could a gentleman devote himself to politics and philosophy. The grubby business of buying, selling and making things was left to 'mechanics': slaves, foreigners and the poor. This is one of the reasons why Greek science rarely translated directly into material progress: estimating the size of the earth is an occupation fit for a cultured aristocrat -- improving the efficiency of a plow or saving the labor of a blacksmith, on the other hand, will merely make the slaves who do the work lazy.

__Treatment of women.__ Greeks generally didn't afford much freedom or agency to their women. Despite their reputation for free-thinking, Greek men kept Greek women ("respectable" ones, at any rate) locked up in the kind of seclusion that today we'd associate with _The Arabian Nights_ . Rigorous segregation ruled public life and even private spaces -- only the raciest Greek women would be seen in a dinner party at their own home. Legal rights, particularly the right to own property and to seek divorce, were extremely limited.

During the classical era the only women we hear of in the arts and literature are what we euphemistically call "courtesans," that is, high-class prostitutes: "respectable" women didn't get much in the way of education and certainly didn't attend philosophy lectures in public. The primary exception to these rules was Sparta, which despite (or more likely, because of) its deep-seated militarism encouraged women to exercise in public (to "produce strong children"), to manage property ("while the husband is away on campaign") and allowed them to divorce ("to weed out unfit husbands"). The status of women did improve somewhat over time, as increasing wealth -- and the example of Rome, where women had far more rights and freedoms -- eroded the old fashioned regime. Many of the famous literary women of the Greek world came not from Greece itself but from outposts like Alexandria where traditional Greek misogyny was diluted by other cultural influences.

__Xenophobia.__ Although the Greeks could and did talk in a universalist language about humanity, and though philosophers tried to derive their systems from logical principles rather than national tradition, the Greeks were not, on the whole, very interested in other cultures and ways of life. In the classical city-states, it was extremely hard even for Greeks from other cities to become full citizens; it took a long time before Greeks in the diaspora accepted non-Greeks as more or less equals. Even then it was really only in Egypt -- where Greeks formed less than a third of the populace -- that the Greeks really engaged with a native culture; elsewhere they did eventually condescend to letting other folks adopt Greek language and customs but they were rarely willing to learn from them.

The Romans, by contrast, extended citizenship far more widely -- both to other cultures and also to freed slaves. Even long after the Greeks had been conquered by the Romans they remained inalterably convinced of their cultural superiority -- most educated Romans learned Greek, but comparatively few educated Greeks returned the favor. There were Roman emperors from Spain, Libya, Syria, Romania, Gaul and several non-Roman cities in Italy -- but the big Hellenistic powers (Macedon, Seleucia, and Ptolemaic Egypt) remained firmly in the hands of a Greek ruling class.

__They gave up on democracy__ . Greece is, of course, the birthplace of democracy; the word itself is of Greek origin and the democratic period in Athens (from roughly 500 to 322 BC) produced a famous explosion of literature, art, and some very radical political movements. But democracy was not really the ordinary Greek mode of politics.

In the classical period most Greek cities were aristocratic republics (closer in structure to Rome than to Athens). After the startling career of Alexander though, the entire Hellenic world gradually slid into precisely the kind of theocratic monarchies that the Greeks had fought at Marathon and Salamis. A few proud (and lucky) cities maintained their independence but most of the Greek world ended up in the hands of one or another of Alexander's successors. These military adventurers adopted the Persian and Egyptian habit of treating rulers as living divinities. The heirs of Socrates composed embarrassingly over-the-top hymns in honour of one military adventurer after another, using language that would make even Kim Jong Un blush for shame. The nation that refused to bend a knee before Darius and Xerxes ended up prostrate on the floor before statues of Ptolemy and Antiochus. Neither the rationalism of the philosopher nor the independence of the democrats was enough to keep the Greeks on their feet.

