# What was the underlying cause for the collapse of the Roman Republic?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-01-07
	views: 1143
	upvotes: 18
	quora url: /What-was-the-underlying-cause-for-the-collapse-of-the-Roman-Republic/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


[Jeff Kay](https://www.quora.com/profile/Jeff-Kay)'s answer gives some good background. 

The Republic was always a competitive forum where different aristocratic factions competed for power and influence through public service. Different clans (_gentes)_  were dominant at different times, but the combination of everybody-gang-up-on-the-winner politics, fights between plebeian rich people and patrician rich people, and external threats kept the competition within bounds. 

While there were occasional standout figures who were the first among equals (_primus inter pares_ ), institutions like the dual consulship and regular rotation of offices generally kept the regular handover of power going, even in times of crisis. One of the most impressive achievement of the Republic was the long roll of Dictators - emergency solo leaders - who peacefully returned to civilian life after a taste of supreme power: One of the reasons that [Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Quinctius_Cincinnatus), [Marcus Furius Camillus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Furius_Camillus) and [Fabius Maximus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fabius_Maximus) were folk heroes as well as revered statesmen is that they embodied the norm of surrendering personal power for the public good (not by accident did George Washington call his veterans organization [The Society of the Cincinnati](http://www.societyofthecincinnati.org/): they wanted to emulate Cinnicinatus by proving that they could lay down the supreme power and return to civilian life).

Things really changed after the Second Punic War (ended 201 BC). The defeat of Carthage meant that Rome had no serious rivals in the western Mediterranean, which weakened the need for solidarity against external enemies. At the same time, the successful conclusion of the war disrupted the social fabric of Italy: 20 years of war devastated the Italian countryside, from fighting (including civil wars in many Italian cities) and because so much rural manpower was serving away from home. War booty and a large influx of slaves allowed successful generals, in particular, to create larger and larger estates or [Latifundia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latifundium). Like the [enclosures](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enclosure) of the 18th century this benefited the overall economy, but destroyed the relatively egalitarian life of the peasantry. 

The result was more urban poor -- easier to buy as voters, more willing to attach themselves to an ambitious general as soldiers, and less tied to traditional clan relationships. All of this weakened the balance of power among the aristocrats, creating more and more aggressive swings of power between factions. 

Things really began to unravel around 130 BC. The [Gracchi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gracchi) tried to legislate land reforms and other measures to help the urban poor. The aristocratic reaction was violent -- the murder of Tiberius Gracchus was the first political killing in Rome for centuries. This started a cycle of violence between aristocratic and popular factions that continued on and off until the destruction of the Republic by Caesar -- who was nominally the leader of the popular faction of his day. This period of strife, ending in the death of the Republic, is usually known as the [Crisis of the Roman Republic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crisis_of_the_Roman_Republic), lasting from 130BC down to 27BC 

The conflict was not exactly a modern class conflict (Caesar, for example, was from one of the 'best' families in Rome; Cicero, who was the leading conservative intellectual of his day, was a 'new man' with no distinguished family) but it certainly included social overtones. It also blended into fights about the status of non-Roman Italians, culminating in the [Social War (90–88 BC)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_War_%2890%E2%80%9388_BC%29) in which Romes traditional allies tried, unsuccessfully, to gain citizenship for themselves.

The political conflict was made much worse by the increasing professionalization of the military. The weak peasant economy destroyed the old Roman tradition of citizen soldiering. After the [Marian reforms](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marian_reforms) Roman armies became increasingly reliant on long-service soldiers who had no homes to return to, as opposed to farmers and townsmen on short service. The new model armies were more powerful and well trained than their predecessors -- but were much more personally loyal to their commanders than to the Republic as a whole. Not coincidentally the first real civil war in Roman history pitted [Gaius Marius](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Marius) -- the military genius from an undistinguished family who created the new model army -- against [Sulla](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sulla), another talented general but also an aristocrat. Both used their armies as personal tools against each other. 

Sulla won the first round, rolling back the populist agenda of Marius and his supporters, but the Marian faction survived and was eventually headed by Caesar. However by Caesar's day, the social conflict between rich and poor had degenerated into pure power competition between wealthy, successful generals like Caesar and [Pompey](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pompey): the support of an army and the spoils of conquest could make a successful general more powerful than the government itself, as Caesar proved when he crossed the Rubicon. After Caesar's death the same was true: the Republic was reduced to a talking shop, a kind of domestic United Nations where the competing dynasts could negotiate or make speeches, rather than a functioning goverment. 

Caesars' heir Octavian who (as emperor Augustus) won the last of the civil wars when he defeated Marc Antony and Cleopatra after another one of the many power sharing deals which marked this period collapsed. After more than two generations of civil wars, the average citizen was glad just to have peace and the old elites had been devastated by fighting and political terrorism. Nostalgia for the Republic remained for a long time among conservative aristocrats but the whole system had failed conclusively long before Augustus took the throne.

