# Which ancient library's destruction represents the greater historical loss between Alexandria and Baghdad?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-07-05
	views: 12410
	upvotes: 90
	quora url: /Which-ancient-librarys-destruction-represents-the-greater-historical-loss-between-Alexandria-and-Baghdad/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Both losses were tragedies for bibliophiles, historians, and literateurs. Neither meant much for "progress"

[The Library of Alexandria was “destroyed” several times](https://www.quora.com/How-was-the-Library-of-Alexandria-destroyed/answer/Steve-Theodore) : most seriously by Julius Caesars troops during his conquest of Egypt; again in the civil wars of Aurelian, in inter-communal fighting between Christians and pagans in 391, and (according to legend) again by Caliph Omar in 642.

From a scholarly perspective its a depressing story: there are a lot of books we'll never see that once sat on those shelves (or, more accurately, were rolled up into those pigeonholes: the library probably never had bound codexes, or if it did they were late additions). However, the notion that the loss of this single resource somehow retarded 'progress' is melodramatic. Information storage and retrieval was vastly more expensive and cumbersome in the pre-printing era, but it wasn't magic: if the wealthy and powerful wanted information they could get it.

For example, after Caesar's troops had burned down part of the Alexandrian Library, Marc Antony made it up to Cleopatra by giving her the contents of the [Library of Pergamum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Library_of_Pergamum). Many of the most valuable manuscripts in Alexandria would have existed in private collections across the Greek and Roman world. As long as the intellectual and economic context in which the Library existed remained intact, the fate of that single set of buildings and books was primarily of interest to collectors and specialists -- it's heartbreaking to know that we will never have the best manuscripts of Euripides, or the whole text of Manetho, or Alexander the Great's letters. But while the ancient social fabric was intact the standout books were primarily collectors' items. Individual books themselves were precious, but definitely not _priceless_ .

The real loss came with the radical decline in urban civilization that started under Diocletian; it wasn't just one library that vanished, it was countless thousands that mouldered away because their owners were too poor to maintain them, or because the cities which gave them life were depopulating due to plagues, economic decline and perpetual insecurity. Ancient books were fragile. Between say 400 and 1400 we lost far more than 95% of everything written in antiquity, not to dramatic fires and sacks but to gradual decay and impoverishment. Only great care and expensive, laborious recopying could keep them from slowly disappearing due to natural causes. The loss of a single library was a wound, but the decay of urban, commercial and literary life was a wasting disease, far more deadly for literature.

The effects of that decay were not uniform everywhere. The Ummayads and after them the Abbasids (and, of course, the Byzantines) inherited a huge amount of the still intact, still functional literary culture of the old Mediterranean world. The contents of the Wonder House were not merely of Greek or Roman origin, but did incorporate many translations and reinterpretations. Arab scholars also has access to Indian and Chinese material, including not only books but the paper on which books were printed. Wealth was inseparable from the maintenance of libraries before printing, and in the golden Age of Baghdad the Caliphs had the resources which poorer European princelings did not. In Europe, monasteries famously preserved books: this was an index not only of dedication, but also of the fact that they were [the only institutions that could afford it](http://www.quora.com/How-did-monasteries-manage-to-stay-out-of-many-of-the-problems-of-the-dark-ages/answer/Steve-Theodore?srid=zLvM&share=1).

The destruction of the Wonder House is a striking example of the resilience of a living culture: despite the sack (and other Mongol horrors) Arab and Islamic culture continued to thrive -- and many of the books that were burnt in Baghdad existed as copies in Cairo or Cadiz. Again, precious originals and rare editions were lost; but again, the key knowledge that mattered was already replicated elsewhere.

So: the notion that only a single institution had a lot of irreplaceable knowledge and that it all went up in a big conflagration is overblown.

The notion that the fate of the libraries is connected with technological progress is also pretty tenuous. Ancient literary culture was not primarily practical or technological. Much of the kind of knowledge we think of as constituting 'progress' was deliberately kept secret. In a world without patent laws, your incentives to make your trade secrets public were very few: a wealthy gentleman of leisure might write books about the nature of the soul or the movements of the celestial spheres. Entrepreneurs and engineers usually came from the less privileged, less educated classes : the folks who built blast furnaces for industrial glass production in Libya, or designed the waterwheels that pumped out mines in Portugal, or who invented the lateen sail were rarely part of the literary class who populated the ancient libraries. There were some exceptions: medicine, astronomy, architecture and anything military had enough social cachet to attract gentleman-authors (although, in the case of medicine it's not always clear that keeping the old books was a help: the outsized influence of [Galen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galen), for example, led to a lot of sterile nitpicking instead of progress in medicine down the centuries). In general, though, the technical progress of antiquity seems to us to be completely silent because it didn't attract literary attention. Only a handful of ancient authors --- [Vitruvius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitruvius#Machines), for example -- deigned to really delve into the grubby business of making things.

So that's a long winded way of saying 'neither'

