# Why were there no big cities in Western Europe for many years after the fall of the Roman Empire?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-09-05
	views: 4745
	upvotes: 45
	quora url: /Why-were-there-no-big-cities-in-Western-Europe-for-many-years-after-the-fall-of-the-Roman-Empire/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


The big cities had begun emptying out before collapse of the Empire. There were 3 big causes for the de-urbanisation.

__Plagues.__ The [Antonine Plague](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antonine_Plague) of 165 and the [Plague of Cyprian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plague_of_Cyprian) in 250 had already hit hard at many population centers before the western Imperial line failed, and the [Plague of Justinian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plague_of_Justinian) in 541 was comparable to the medieval Black Death for intensity. These plagues discouraged urbanization because the spread fastest in densely populated cities. They also permanently lowered the population base (the 'barbarian invaders' didn't replenish the population because they came in very small numbers -- tens or perhaps hundreds of thousands, but not millions). In southern Europe, many areas did not regain their Roman populations until the 17th century (In the north, advances in agriculture did push the population past Roman levels by the 11th century or so - but the distribution of people was much less concentrated).

__Economics__ . You could make a good case that Rome really "fell" in the 3rd century rather than the fifth. The third century was an interminable series of civil wars, interspersed with barbarian invasions and foreign wars: There were 33 emperors in the 50 years from 235 to 285, almost none of whom died of natural causes (see [Why was the Roman succession so violent? Why weren't they able to establish a functional succession system like other large empires?](https://www.quora.com/Why-was-the-Roman-succession-so-violent-Why-werent-they-able-to-establish-a-functional-succession-system-like-other-large-empires)). At one point the empire had split into 3 competing territories and had to be reunified by force. Diocletian, who finally brought some semblance of order back to the Roman world, resorted to extremely heavy-handed means to both refill the imperial treasury and to prevent future instability. He imposed [empire-wide price and wage controls](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edict_on_Maximum_Prices) , implemented a much more aggressive form of centralized bureaucracy, and legally tied most of the population into hereditary professions. 

Diocletian's drastic measures worked: the empire was saved. However they also gradually destroyed the economic basis of the early empire: commerce and trade became less profitable and many rich people left the cities to set up self-sufficient (and less heavily taxed) lives on their country estates. In essence Diocletian's reforms set the stage for the medieval economic pattern, though it took a long time for the effects to be fully felt (see [How much more powerful could the Roman Empire have become with a thorough understanding of modern economics and finance?](https://www.quora.com/How-much-more-powerful-could-the-Roman-Empire-have-become-with-a-thorough-understanding-of-modern-economics-and-finance)) Cities -- which could not feed themselves and depended on trade and specialty production -- declined in importance and size. The process snowballed as culture and politics no longer existed in an urban matrix, centering instead on country estates and royal courts.

__Politics:__ The empires still boasted several large cities, above all Rome which still had a population of 800,000 when it was first sacked by the Goths in 410. However the cities depended on reliable food supplies: Rome, in particular, was heavily dependent on the bulk trade in grain from North Africa and Egypt. Political instability in the 4th and 5th centuries threatened and eventually cut off the irreplaceable grain supplies, making the city untenable: it was simply not possible to move enough food to keep the city fed without secure sea lanes to the breadbaskets in the south. Land transportation was inadequate to the task.

Politics also figured in de-urbanization because the fragmented politics of the west made many large-scale projects impossible to finance. A megaproject like an aqueduct required the financial and technical resources of a vast region. As the west broke up into smaller and smaller units with weaker and weaker governments, the kinds of infrastructure that sustained Roman era cities were simply too expensive for the successor states to maintain -- it's like the fate of the Soviet era space program in the post-1989 Central Asian republics (see [Why were the social and infrastructural advancements of the Roman Empire lost to the Middle Ages?](https://www.quora.com/Why-were-the-social-and-infrastructural-advancements-of-the-Roman-Empire-lost-to-the-Middle-Ages))

