# Why was there no priestly class in ancient Greece?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-01-24
	views: 1612
	upvotes: 11
	quora url: /Why-was-there-no-priestly-class-in-ancient-Greece/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Actually there was a caste, in the sense that priests were usually drawn from traditional aristocratic families. A couple of well-known historical examples include the Telliadae, a family famous for their skills as diviners (for example [Hegesistratus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hegesistratus)) and their rivals the Clytiade ([Tisamenus](http://mythagora.com/encyctxt/enct.html#tisamenus1) being one). In most cities different cults (that is temple practices - not sects!) were managed by hereditary priests -- the [Eumolpidae](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eumolpidae) administered the Eleusinian mysteries in Athens, and important religious duties in Sparta were limited to members of the two royal lineages. It was possible, though rare, for new temples and cults to be founded, and in those cases 'ownership' of the priestly role typically passed down through the family of the founder as well (in Greek colonies, for example, the families of the original settlers often had religious duties which latecomers did not). 

In most cities there were also civic priesthoods which were made by appointment. We don't know as much as we would like about how these functioned, but they may have been limited to only some families even though they were temporary offices. In Athens, for example, the religious office of [Archon basileus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archon_basileus) was originally limited to the traditional aristocracy but later extended to all rich citizens. The property qualification was no accident; part of the job of most priesthoods included maintaining temples and organizing ceremonies out of one's own funds! 

It is however more or less correct to say that there was no _professional_ priesthood in Greece. The priests were members of the upper classes, which typically meant they were landed aristocrats. Priesthood was one of their civic duties, not unlike being a local magistrate or (in later times) a justice of the peace: it was not a full time job with a salary one could live off, with a few exceptions. A priesthood provided social clout, but not institutional or legal power (except in some interesting edge cases: for example, the taking of omens could have a big impact on the timing of a battle or a vote in the assembly, and some religious taboos forbade particular activities on certain days; later, Roman aristocrats turned the manipulation of these kinds of things for political advantage into an art form). 

At a big pilgrimage site like Delphi or Olympia, the temple could function as a more or less self-sustaining entity. Pilgrims were a major part of the civic economy, so there would be more regular support from the city; the revenues from pilgrims and donations could keep the temple going and support a more or less full-time set of functionaries as well. For example, the chief priestess at Delphi -- the [Pythia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pythia) -- was chosen by the temple itself and the requirements are not clear to us. Running these kinds of institutions was a more demanding task than presiding over festivals at smaller shrines, so it became more professionalised over time.

As one side effect of the de-centralisation of Greek religious life, you see that Greek religious art is less lavish than in other contemporary cultures. An Egyptian temple, for example, was a self-sustaining corporation -- it owned land and lived largely off of rents. Greek temples by contrast were maintained by the sporadic generosity of worshippers, the efforts of their priests, or the occasional gift from the city. 

This meant Greek temples did not evolve into the stunning complexes seen in Egypt or Mesopotamia. There were, of course, amazing buildings (the [Parthenon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parthenon) in Athens, built in celebration of the victory of Persia; the Temple of Olympian Zeus at [Agrigentum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valle_dei_Templi), again in celebration of a victory; the famous statue of Zeus at Olympia) but they were exceptions: the 'ordinary' temple was a less elaborate and dependent on the fortunes of patrons for its upkeep, and different shrines rose and fell in prominence over time.

In later times, particularly after Alexander, temples were often supported directly by the various Hellenistic kings (even, frequently, outside their own countries for propaganda or prestige purposes). 

Another side effect is that Greek religion is generally subordinate to the needs of the state : while religious traditions or prohibitions certainly shaped political behavior, there is no large, organized body of religious opinion or 'orthodoxy' that could be enforced. No Greek king could be forced to negotiate a peace for fear of excommunication, no Greek temple would lead opposition to a particular piece of legislation. There were outbursts of religious feelings, particularly in times of crisis, but they were "bottom up" rather than "top down". When Alcibiades and Socrates were prosecuted for impiety it was by private citizens, not religious officials.

Finally, the decentralized nature of Greek religion meant that it stayed intensely local. Since almost no-one dedicated their entire life to a religious vocation, there was little systematic effort to harmonize the many different conflicting traditions and stories that made up the Greek world view. Different cities and even different temples within one city might have different traditions and opinions. This suited the Greek character - inclined to argument! - but also made it hard for Greek religion to form a coherent philosophy or outlook. One of the reasons outside religions -- Judaism, Christianity, Mithraism and the cults of Isis and Ishtar -- pushed Greek religion aside is that it didn't provide a strong, organized and interlocking set of beliefs.

