# Why is it so hard for huge online video game companies to ban cheaters?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-11-23
	views: 1272
	upvotes: 14
	quora url: /Why-is-it-so-hard-for-huge-online-video-game-companies-to-ban-cheaters/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


It's actually an instance of the same general problem that afflicts all efforts to control other people's behavior. You can create a system where the behavior you want to encourage is easier than the alternative; you can create a system with draconian punishments for non-compliance; you can create a system with big rewards for going along. But once your target population gets large enough you simply can't even imagine all the ways people who don't want to do it your way can resist, subvert or evade what you want to do. From anti-smoking laws to tax codes to the gold farming, the cheaters will always be there. 

Games is probably the starkest example of the the principle because developers have powers in their domain that no sports league, government or secret society could ever dream of. We can_alter the laws of reality itself._ 

And we still can't stop the cheaters.

Part of it is simply __numbers__ . The audience for any moderately successful game will outnumber the development team several thousand times over: A "huge" company like Blizzard has fewer than 5,000 employees trying to service more than 6 million players. And far fewer than 5% of those 5,000 are actually working on the core infrastructure of the game: answering the phones in the Slovenian customer service office or modeling special Panda hats is fun, but it's not a frontline job in the war on cheaters. So you're really thinking about three hundred or fewer people who could actually usefully contribute to anti-cheating efforts. Since the average WoW player spends more than [20 hours a week ](http://www.statista.com/statistics/327295/time-spent-playing-world-of-warcraft/)(!) playing, the internet is accumulating millions of hours of experience with the ins and outs of WoW every week (to date the internet has over [ 6 million person-years of WoW](http://kotaku.com/5891421/nearly-6-million-years-of-world-of-warcraft-healthy-for-players-brains) knowledge; Blizzard devs probably have about 5 thousand). The community as a whole knows the game infinitely better than its creators (this is a common lament among all developers: we know what we _wanted_  to do, but any coder will tell you it rarely turns out exactly as planned). And, in the internet era, any exploit -- no matter how obscure -- will be common knowledge very fast.

Another part is __how damn clever people are.__ Cheaters actually have a wide variety of motivations, from malicious trolling to financial gain to HaX0r bragging rights to simple larking around. People can be incredibly tenacious and clever when the bug bites them: As much as it pisses me off, I can't help but be impressed at the people who set up packet sniffers to watch their network traffic then reverse engineer the data coming from the servers, or the ones who decompile the game client to see whats' going on under the hood. It doesn't matter that .01% of the cheaters are this good: thanks to the inter-tubes the exploits of the tiny minority will be available to anybody who trusts a Russian warez site in short order (incidentally: if we could stop the cheaters, don't you think we'd have stopped the pirates _first?)_ 

__ In an audience of millions, there's probably at least one person who's as clever as anybody on the team... and who has a lot more free time.

Lastly -- but most importantly -- there's the __dynamic nature of games__ . Games (like good laws, come to think of it) have to have some flexibility -- they have to allow for individual style and different strategies and exploratory behavior if they are to succeed. But for any game interesting enough to be worth playing, that usually means there will be 'cheats' which are actually just completely legitimate uses of incomplete, poorly balanced or inadequately tested systems: Most cheats I've personally encountered are not actually 'hacks' invented by fiendish Anonymous types who spider-scoped the game; most of the them are really just people using our mistakes, oversights and lack of foresight against us (or, less forgivably, against other players). Just as the line between 'a clever legal strategy' and 'fraud' can be pretty fuzzy in the real world, many of the shady ways people exploit games are only 'cheats' because they represent poor sportsmanship and insider information triumphing over skill, not because somebody busted out the W411H4xx!!!. 

These kind of exploits are the worst for developers.

 If we penalize people for using the tools we ourselves have given them, we come off like sore losers; if we don't, we get a busted game. These kinds of mistakes are embarrassing, because they mean we screwed up; but fixing them frequently has unforeseen side-effects which can create different problems from bugs to new exploits. As the code base gets bigger and more complex the loopholes multiply until the rule set starts to resemble a tax code -- for the same reason: the people with the power are always running around playing whack-a-mole with their 'users', creating new exploits as they stamp out old ones. In games it's also emotionally fraught: people lover their little exploits, and sometimes taking them out diminishes the game, at least in the eyes of some people. I once fixed a behavior in Counter-Strike that would let one player headshot and kill a second player even though, on the second player's screen, the first player looked to be firing straight up in the air. I got actual death threats over that one (well, _internet_  death threats, which is not the same thing I suppose).

