# Why was the Akkadian Empire considered a part of the Sumerian civilization while the Assyrians and Babylonians were classified separately if their language was Akkadian?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-07-05
	views: 1851
	upvotes: 22
	quora url: /Why-was-the-Akkadian-Empire-considered-a-part-of-the-Sumerian-civilization-while-the-Assyrians-and-Babylonians-were-classified-separately-if-their-language-was-Akkadian/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Sumerians, Sumero-Akkadians, Assyrians and Babylonians all shared a great deal of cultural tradition; the boundaries between them are in some ways a modern convenience more than a hard historical dividing line. However the latter two are much newer, and they rose in a period when there was enough political and military competition in the region for there to be clearly distinct regional powers with long-term identities, unlike the city-state period where alliances and the balance of power shifted rapidly.

Sargon's empire was based in the Sumerian heartland (his capital was [Kish](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kish_(Sumer)of) - among other things, the home of [Enmebaragesi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enmebaragesi), the first demonstrably historical king -- see [Steve Theodore's answer to How did the first kings gain power?](http://www.quora.com/How-did-the-first-kings-gain-power/answer/Steve-Theodore?srid=zLvM&share=1)) . Although he clearly spoke Akkadian, and leaned heavily on Akkadian speakers to be his administrators and soldiers, Sumerian remained the primary language of law, literature and religion in his empire. It's not clear to what degree Akkadian and Sumerian speakers represented different ethnic groups or to what degree they intermingled; older scholarship tended to see the Akkadians as outsiders who came in and surmounted existing Sumerian people but nowadays the emphasis tends to be on coexistence and interchange: it may be, for example, that Akkadian was already at this time -- as it was to be later -- a _lingua franca_ of trade and commerce that was shared by many distinct ethnic groups.

Hammurabi and his Babylonian dynasty were originally Amorites. Amorite is a [northwest Semitic language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northwest_Semitic_languages), while Akkadian is in the [eastern Semitic group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/East_Semitic_languages), so the ruling stratum was different even though the bulk of the population probably spoke Akkadian. The city was much younger, rising in the 2d millenium BC, long after the older cities of the Sumerian heartland. Although the Babylonians retained cuneiform writing and many elements of the Sumero-Akkadian tradition they also added some definite changes off their own; in particular, the intense commercial life of Babylon was also a notable contrast to the more settled agrarian focus of the Sumerians. The second, more powerful incarnation of Babylon was ruled by the [Kassites](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kassites), another outside group. This makes it useful to distinguish the Babylonians from the Sumerian substrate -- even Sumerian literary and intellectual heritage was a key part of Babylonian culture.

Assyria's heartland is well outside the core of Sumeria; Assyrian culture was deeply shaped by their exposed strategic position and very different agricultural base. Although Assur and much of later Assyria was tributary to Sargon and his successors it also had close cultural ties to Syria, Asia Minor, and Armenia forming a distinctive culture: more centralized, more warlike, and more unified than the Sumerians (Assyria was in some ways 'Rome' to Sumeria's 'Greece') . They were a distinct ethnic group even though they spoke the same language, and there was a lot of tension between Assyrians and their southern neighbors throughout antiquity: they repeatedly conquered and were expelled from the Sumerian heartland, and they dueled back and forth with Babylon as long as both powers existed it's not very useful to treat them as a single continuous group, even though they did share the common cultural heritage of Sumer.

