# Why didn't the industrial revolution occur in ancient Rome or Greece?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2015-03-11
	views: 15771
	upvotes: 162
	quora url: /Why-didnt-the-industrial-revolution-occur-in-ancient-Rome-or-Greece/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


The cheap answer is slavery: the existence of lots of conscript labor retarded industrial development in the ancient world -- with so much extra labor available at whip-reach, there was little incentive to invest in productivity and also there was a smaller working class to whom you could conceivably sell products.

That's the cheap answer. It's not entirely wrong, but it's very misleading.

The industrial revolution also required some conditions that weren't present in antiquity. Probably the biggest factor was that agricultural productivity was too low: the amount of food you could grow on a given amount of arable land wasn't enough support the massive diversion of labor into other pursuits. The Romans were chronically dependent on Egypt and North Africa for food, in large part because their agricultural techniques were only really suitable for the Mediterranean basin. The prosperous agricultural economy of northern Europe in the 18th century was only possible because of [important advances in agriculture made in the Middle Ages](http://www.flowofhistory.com/units/west/10/FC63): without the 3-field system, suitable ploughs, and horse collars Rome could not effectively utilize the resources of big swaths of its territory. This is one of the reasons the western half of the empire remained poor compared to the east, and one of the underlying causes of the Roman/Byzantine split.

Another important factor was social. The Roman aristocracy -- not totally unlike the landowning classes of 18th C Europe, it's true -- looked down on 'trade'. There are plenty of examples of Roman aristocrats being forbidden by law to engage in commerce. These were violated all the time , of course -- greed is a constant in human affairs -- but the social distinction between the class that created and administered the laws and the class that ran the non-agricultural economy was absolute. It's certainly true that 18th C. Europe had plenty of land-owning aristocrats who despised "tradesmen" and "mechanics"; but it's also true that a series of legal changes beginning in the Renaissance had made the actual business of business much easier and more efficient. Roman law didn't have a real concept of the corporation, and more importantly it included no system for selling shares (see [Did stock markets exist at the time of the Roman Empire?](https://www.quora.com/Did-stock-markets-exist-at-the-time-of-the-Roman-Empire)) This made raising capital for industrial purposes much, much harder than it would be in the real industrial era. Roman-era governments, clearly, were pretty good at managing huge capital projects like aqueducts, roads and harbors: but these were government work, subcontracted out to a zillion little groups. There's not much evidence for large scale private capital projects in antiquity.

Another important difference is the lack of intellectual property law. Patents were more or less invented in the Renaissance (the first industrial patent was for the design of the cranes used to build the Duomo in Florence). In a pre-patent economy, important information has to be kept secret: that's one of the reasons many Roman inventions were lost during the end of the western empire -- they weren't just forgotten, they had been deliberately hidden by families or guild groups and when those failed the knowledge was lost. In the 18th century, on the other hand, inventors could use patents to protect their investments, but also extend existing inventions in a way that allowed the extender to profit as well: somebody like [James Watt](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Watt) could improve the steam engine from a curiosity to a key industrial technology and have a reasonable hope of profiting.

Lastly, the industrial revolution depended on the existence of a large class of consumers. Big sections of the Roman world were slave-based, and slaves aren't good targets for marketing or sales. But big areas were also essentially subsistence economies which did not produce enough surplus to make industrial trade possible. One of the paradoxical side effects of the Black Death in western Europe was the generally improved status of the working class: the labor shortage that followed the Black Death resulted in more political and economic freedom for the bulk of people in the west (not much, perhaps, by our standards: but still good compared to many contemporaries). This helped to create the "middle class" : people rich enough to have some economic aims beyond not starving, even though not rich enough to aspire to owning land and joining the aristocracy. The industrial revolution depended on the existence of this class -- and enormously increased its size, power, and influence. 

So: there's a lot of moving parts. The cleverness, literacy, and even relative prosperity of the ancient world were great things -- but a lot of other parts had to fall into place -- most of them things that were invented during the later middle ages -- before the modern world was even remotely possible.

