# How Jewish are Philo and Josephus in their writing?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2016-12-17
	views: 1458
	upvotes: 34
	quora url: /How-Jewish-are-Philo-and-Josephus-in-their-writing/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Josephus and Philo are very different writers. The one thing they share is profound ambivalence about assimilation into Greco-Roman culture. Each is at pains to display his credentials as a cultured gentleman of the _oikumene_ ; each wants to assert the same right to national pride as Greeks and Romans; each is also quite clearly – painfully – conscious of the gulf that separates himself and his people from their neighbors. That mixture of successful assimilation, independence, and permanent reserve seems to me, at any rate to be how they manifest ‘Jewishness’. It certainly colors everything that Josephus and Philo had to write.

In most other ways, though, they are pretty different. Philo’s first language was probably Greek – although he clearly knows some Hebrew, his biblical quotations are always from the Septuagint and not the original. His Greek education was quite extensive, enough that he livens up his Greek writings with deliberate Atticisms. For example:

> ἐπειδὴ δὲ κατὰ τὸν ἱερώτατον Πλάτωνα “φθόνος ἔξω θείου χοροῦ ἵσταται”, θειότατον δὲ καὶ κοινωνικώτατον σοφία, συγκλείει μὲν οὐδέποτε τὸ ἑαυτῆς φροντιστήριον, ἀναπεπταμένη δὲ ἀεὶ δέχεται τοὺς ποτίμων διψῶντας λόγων, οἷς ἀκράτου διδασκαλίας ἄφθονον ἐπαντλοῦσα νᾶμα μεθύειν τὴν νηφάλιον ἀναπείθει μέθην.

> According to Plato (that most holy of writers) “Envy is removed far from the divine chorus”, but Wisdom – that most divine and communicative of all things – never closes her school and is continually open to receive all who thirst for salutary doctrines, to whom she pours forth the inexhaustible stream of unalloyed instruction and wisdom, and persuades them to yield to the intoxication of the soberest of all drunkenness.

[That Every Good Man Is Free, 13](http://khazarzar.skeptik.net/books/philo/libersig.htm)

Some modern readers think this piece is a school essay of Philo’s youth: in it he quotes Euripides several times with only a passing reference to the Hebrew Bible. It’s a pretty standard, if florid, example of what an educated first-century Greek with philosophical leanings would write. The core of that piece is a common trope in Stoic writings, the idea that that true freedom meant independence from passions and desires rather than a legal or political state.

It’s a theme which could be appealing to Philo in his capacity as a philosopher… or in his capacity as a second-class citizen.

Philo’s most famous writings, though, are devoted to specifically Jewish themes. However they never shed the mantle of Greek modes of thought and expression. His most famous works present Jewish tradition in Greek philosophical trappings. His [key works](http://www.earlychristianwritings.com/yonge/) are allegorical interpretation of the Old Testament, presenting it as a heavily coded kind of philosophical treatise.

This allegorical approach was, itself, eminently Greek: the [Middle Academy](http://www.iep.utm.edu/midplato/) of his day was heavily invested in the idea of different ‘grades’ or truth. This made it natural for many Hellenistic philosophers to read a text like the Iliad as not merely a story of gods and heroes, but as a heavily coded explanation of deeper truths. Philo’s enthusiastic embrace of the technique is eminently _au courant_  for a Hellenistic philosopher. Still, he clearly uses it in the service of a zealous effort to present Jewish truths; you could analogize it to, say, a writer in a post-colonial country using Marxist or Deconstructionist techniques to present unfamiliar aspects of his native culture to a western audience in ‘modern’ garb.

Hebrew words appear here and there for etymological value, particularly when a proper name contains a hidden philosophical story; but overall the project is very much the way an educated Greek would approach a complex, authoritative but unsystematic and ‘unphilosophical’ text. It’s tackled in much the same way Plutarch discusses Egyptian sacred texts in [Of Isis and Osiris](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A2008.01.0239%3Asection%3D1) – though Philo clearly knows Hebrew reasonably well, while Plutarch’s grasp of Egyptian is extremely tenuous. Hebrew data points are just that, though: data points. The interpretive framework and linguistic scaffolding are thoroughly Greek, even though Philo’s agenda is stoutly Jewish.

Allegorizing the Bible was also, of course, a canny way to approach both Greek readers and Hellenized fellow Jews in a way which minimized the alien-ness of Judaism. Philo wrote at a time when the Jews were the focus of a lot of organized hostility, both in Judea but even moreso in his native Alexandria. His allegorical strategy allows him to expound on Judaism as a culmination of, rather than a challenge to, Hellenistic philosophical ideas: it was both an appeal to Gentile readers and a way of encouraging Jewish readers to find an accommodation with the surrounding culture short of apostasy. This was a serious issue in his day: Philo’s nephew, [Tiberius Alexander](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiberius_Julius_Alexander), was a notorious apostate who eventually [led Roman legions in a bloody pogrom against the Jews of Alexandria in 66](http://www.livius.org/sources/content/pogrom-in-alexandria/).

Philo’s writings were always aware of the latent hostility in the air, and his Greek learning is an important part of his mission, which was to protect and defend his people against a hostile Greek literary world and a capricious, potentially dangerous Roman state.



Josephus doesn’t fit as smoothly into the Greek literary world. His native language was Aramaic, and his Greek is usually regarded as inelegant. He also had the misfortune to pick up Greek writing in during the heyday of the [Second Sophistic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second_Sophistic), one of the more florid periods in Greek literature and a more difficult medium for a non-native to master. Philo – immersed in Greek culture from youth – could ‘pass’ if he so chose. Josephus could not; all of his works include protestations that he had to pick up the language in order to tell his story. Stray remarks in his autobiography and his polemical works make it clear that his political opponents used his lack of fluency to belittle him.

Josephus was an outsider in more ways than one: he was, however much he downplays it, a prisoner (albeit a privileged one) living very close to the watchful eye of Roman power. Moreover his Jewish credentials were deeply tarnished: he was a turncoat who worked with the conquering Romans, and as such many of his Jewish contemporaries despised him. He was [a favored apparatchik of the Flavian house](http://grbs.library.duke.edu/article/viewFile/8401/4745), but he had few other friends or allies.

Unsurprisingly, his literary career is a two-front battle, trying simultaneously to rehabilitate Jews in the eyes of their Roman conquerors, but also to justify his own collaboration with the Romans. He occupies an even more dubious position than Polybius, [the Greek historian who did more than anyone else to explain the rise of Rome to the Greeks](https://www.quora.com/What-were-popular-Greek-opinions-of-Rome-especially-before-the-Second-Punic-War-and-Rome’s-ascension-to-supwerpower-status/answer/Steve-Theodore) – and who also had to watch as the Romans turned on his own homeland and destroyed the wealthy ancient city of Corinth in a burst of vindictiveness. The ambiguities of his position tend to find an outlet in an erratic writing style (his actual subject matter is often dubious as well, but that’s a separate and even more complex question).

Josephus isn’t as fluent a Greekling as Philo, but he is forcibly immured within a Greek discourse – particularly Greek historiography, which was inescapable context of everything he wrote. He is very well acquainted with Greek writers – he had to be, because so much of his work is about accusing them of ignorantly and maliciously misrepresenting the Jews and their history.

Nonetheless he is also dependent on Greek sources for long stretches of his work: even information which he should, as a Judaean, have known first hand is sometimes lifted from Greek writers, mistakes and all. This can be read several ways: as simple incompetence, as a coded way of undermining the propaganda he had to write for his Roman masters, or as a reflection of Josephus’s fatally schizophrenic position. It’s not, however, much of a testament to his historiographical judgement or his use of sources. Perhaps the kindest thing you can say in this regard is that he was making the best use of the limited resources available in his gilded cage.

As a Roman surrogate, Josephus is always careful to distinguish between the Greeks and the Romans – and he’s happy to play off Roman stereotypes about Greeks when it suits his purpose. You can see his schizophrenic relation to Hellenism everywhere. It’s evident even in the preface to his first work, [The Jewish War](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0148). It was originally written in Aramaic for a Jewish audience (mostly outside of Judea: the Romans were worried about the attitude of Jewish communities in the Levant and Parthia). He translated it Greek, as he tells us himself in the preface, in order to put his case before a wider audience. It’s widely thought that this project was written at the behest of his captor-cum-patron, [Titus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titus).

It’s clear from the preface that he had some knowledge of the canons of Greek historiography. He invokes the same tropes as Herodotus and Thucydides do to introduce himself and his work. He proclaims his intention to leave a permanent memorial, to record the deeds of both Romans and Jews impartially, and lays out his case for why this conflict was worthy of historical note – all standard fare for a classicizing Greek historian but quite far from the unadorned, abrupt beginning of Jewish histories like [Samuel](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=1+Samuel+1) or [Maccabees](http://www.catholic.org/bible/book.php?id=20)… The prefaces is strangely revealing either of awkward style choices, inner turmoil, or both:

> κἀγὼ μὲν ἀναλώμασι καὶ πόνοις μεγίστοις ἀλλόφυλος ὢν Ἕλλησί τε καὶ Ῥωμαίοις τὴν μνήμην τῶν κατορθωμάτων ἀνατίθημι
thus, I dedicate this work (with costly, great effort) as a memorial of great actions, both to the Greeks and to the foreigners.

Who, one wonders, writes a history of the destruction of his own people while referring to them as ἀλλόφυλος, “foreign”? And is ἀναλώμασι, “with expense” simply an odd word choice? Or a sly nod to the fact that the Flavian Dynasty was paying his bills? Still, national pride isn’t entirely absent: he conclude his ‘dedication’

> τιμάσθω δὴ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν τὸ τῆς ἱστορίας ἀληθές, ἐπεὶ παρ᾽ Ἕλλησιν ἠμέληται.
Yet the truth of history is honored by us [Jews], though it may be neglected by the Greeks.
[Jewish War, preface 1.3](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3atext%3a1999.01.0147)

There’s an even more telling account at the very end of his [Antiquities of the Jews](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0145). This book was a bigger project than the Jewish War, written over a longer period and more removed from the passions of the moment. It’s mostly a retelling of this historical books of the Bible, supplemented with Hellenistic sources in the Seleucid and Roman periods and arranged to provide a positive, respectable version of Jewish history which would sound comfortably familiar to a Greco-Roman audience. Following Philo, Josephus portrays Moses and other Jewish figures as philosopher-lawgivers like Solon or Lycurgus. He also downplays Jewish exceptionalism; for example he skips the story of the [Golden calf](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_calf) in Exodus, presumably for fear of playing to the anti-Semitic rhetoric of his day in which Jews were derided as “misanthropes” - a people who hated all other peoples and their customs.

Unlike Philo, though, he clearly used the Hebrew text of the Bible for his Jewish sources. The portions of this work dealing with Biblical history are clearly recast in Greek historical terms; he frequently describes the internal conflicts of Jewish history in terms derived from the city-state politics of Greece: as conflicts between aristocrats and democrats, or between constitutionalists and tyrants, rather than between the righteous and the wicked, the believers and the unbelievers. Overall he tries to normalize Jewish history in a way which makes it seem more like the history of any other Mediterranean people. At the same time he retains a fundamental Jewish idea: that many of the vicissitudes of Jewish history are divinely inflicted chastisements. Though he disguises this verbally (using “Fate” or “Destiny” where the Bible would say “God”) he is nevertheless deeply committed to the idea that the catastrophes of Israel are part of a larger plan — conquerors come and go but the people endure.

It’s not hard to see why he found this idea compelling.

Unlike an Old Testament prophet, though, he was writing for a _foreign_  audience and he has to wear foreign garb. The [introduction to his Antiquities](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3atext%3a1999.01.0145) starts with another conventional-sounding Greek prologue, describing the work as an inelegant but honest account. Josephus notes that many write to show off their fluency, and others to gratify political passions. Others, on the other hand, are “forced to write history” to bear witness to events in which they were caught up (εἰσὶ δ᾽ οἵτινες ἐβιάσθησαν ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς τῆς τῶν πραγμάτων ἀνάγκης οἷς πραττομένοις παρέτυχον ταῦτα γραφῇ δηλούσῃ περιλαβεῖν). A pose of reluctance might be a rhetorical device for any Greek historian – but in Josephus’ case being “forced” (ἐβιάσθην – he repeats the verb a sentence later) had a very literal application too: as in English it’s a word used for debating an issue – but also the word for conquest… and for rape.

I don’t think this is a case of idle wordplay, though I’m not sure how clear Josephus himself was about the implications of his word choice.

The conclusion of the Antiquities displays the same elements of lonely pride and an outsider’s resentment of Hellenist posturing:

> λέγω δὴ θαρσήσας ἤδη διὰ τὴν τῶν προτεθέντων συντέλειαν, ὅτι μηδεὶς ἂν ἕτερος ἠδυνήθη θελήσας μήτε Ἰουδαῖος μήτε ἀλλόφυλος τὴν πραγματείαν ταύτην οὕτως ἀκριβῶς εἰς Ἕλληνας ἐξενεγκεῖν: ἔχω γὰρ ὁμολογούμενον παρὰ τῶν ὁμοεθνῶν πλεῖστον αὐτῶν κατὰ τὴν ἐπιχώριον παιδείαν διαφέρειν καὶ τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν δὲ γραμμάτων ἐσπούδασα μετασχεῖν τὴν γραμματικὴν ἐμπειρίαν ἀναλαβών, τὴν δὲ περὶ τὴν προφορὰν ἀκρίβειαν πάτριος ἐκώλυσεν συνήθεια. παρ᾽ ἡμῖν γὰρ οὐκ ἐκείνους ἀποδέχονται τοὺς πολλῶν ἐθνῶν διάλεκτον ἐκμαθόντας διὰ τὸ κοινὸν εἶναι νομίζειν τὸ ἐπιτήδευμα τοῦτο μόνον οὐκ ἐλευθέροις τοῖς τυχοῦσιν ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν οἰκετῶν τοῖς θέλουσι, μόνοις δὲ σοφίαν μαρτυροῦσιν τοῖς τὰ νόμιμα σαφῶς ἐπισταμένοις καὶ τὴν τῶν ἱερῶν γραμμάτων δύναμιν ἑρμηνεῦσαι δυναμένοις.

> I say, out of those who would be willing to put forth such an effort, there is no other – be he a Jew or a foreigner – could who render this undertaking [= his book] so accurately in Greek; for most of my compatriots agree that I exceed them in the learning of our own people, and I have undertaken to participate in the learning of the Greeks and to acquire the rules of their language (even though, habitually using the language of my own country, I am not able to pronounce Greek properly) Among us, devotion to foreign languages is not highly regarded, since such business is open not only to free citizens but to any slave who wishes it: only one who interprets [our] laws wisely and can understand the rules of our holy writings is esteemed wise.
Antiquities 20.12.2

(Greek readers will note that this passage itself is very gnarly: a word-for-word rendering would be unreadable in English. See [here](http://sacred-texts.com/jud/josephus/ant-20.htm) and [here](http://lexundria.com/j_aj/20.252-20.268/wst) for other renderings).

The main point is a very typically Josephan ambivalence: he boasts about and deprecates his Greek learning at the same time. It’s not clear to me if the knotty writing is a failed attempt at high style, a deliberate display of otherness, or an effort to cover his flanks against his Jewish critics. In the critical passage he refers to his own tradition as τὴν ἐπιχώριον παιδείαν, literally “native learning” — where “native” has pretty much the same colonial overtones that it does in English. However it has a verbal echo of ἐπιχωρέω: the verb for ‘surrender’ – is that an accident? A bitter irony? A nod to his Roman patrons?

The real Josephus is almost impossible to know: his writing is always a tightly wound ball of colonial tensions and personal compromises.



_PS apologies to_ _[Nick Nicholas](https://www.quora.com/profile/Nick-Nicholas-5)_ _who asked this one a long while ago… I’ve been completely heads down in rendering optimizations and memory bandwidth problems at work, so this sat half-completed on my desktop for a month or more…_ 

