# What did the Ancient Greeks think of the ancient Persians? Did they think of them as barbarians and inferior?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2020-01-05
	views: 14967
	upvotes: 279
	quora url: /What-did-the-Ancient-Greeks-think-of-the-ancient-Persians-Did-they-think-of-them-as-barbarians-and-inferior/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


Persians occupied a strange dual position in the minds of the Greeks.

On the one hand, they were the archetypical _other._ They were exotic — who, in Greece, regards _pants_  as fit wear for a gentleman? They were alien — how could a self-respecting nobleman grovel in the dirt in front of a kings? Even their austere religion was rather puzzling to the Greeks, who had an easier time with the animal-headed deities of the Egyptians than with the absence of statuary and images in Persian worship.

But, more than alien, they were also _scary._ 

The Greeks certainly fought each other all the time but real extinction-level defeats were rare. The Spartans and Athenians fought for an entire generation, but both cities were still standing at the end of the war.* When the Persians destroyed Miletus — probably the fourth largest and wealthiest city in the Greek world — they not only sold all of the survivors into slavery;** they also killed all of the adult male survivors and castrated all of the boys, ensuring that every Milesian family would be extinguished. To the Greeks, who regarded the obligations of family continuity as sacred, this was a far crueler fate than the ordinary fortunes of war when the Athenian playwright Phrynicus turned the events at Miletus into a tragedy for the Athenian stage, he was prosecuted and fined for the distress he inflicted on the audience by merely describing this catastrophe. Miletus was not the only Greek city that the Persians wiped out; from Samos to Eretria, the Persians brought a terrifying level of Near Eastern finality to the relatively amateurish world of Greek warfare.

The tremendous wealth and military might of the Persian empire were something that no Greek could ignore. Even if you take a more modest modern estimate instead of Herodotus’ famous claim of three million, the three hundred thousand or so soldiers of Xerxes’ army instantly became the second largest city in Greece when they stepped off the tremendous bridges which the Persians built to link Asia Minor and Greece. And that army — enormous as it was — was far from the complete strength of the Great King; his garrisons still patrolled in India and Nubia, in the valleys of Afghanistan, on the shores of the Black Sea and the shores of the Red Sea.

Even when military conflict was in abeyance, the Persian presence remained ominous. One of the Spartan kings used to joke, ruefully, that he was driven out of Asia Minor by “ten thousand Persian archers” — the archers in question being Persian gold pieces, which bore the image of an archer on their face. The Persians were quite familiar with the shambolic politics of Greece, and they were happy to expend money freely in order to keep Greeks at each other’s throats — no major state in Greece didn’t at one point or another receive Persian subsidies to fight against whoever was currently the most powerful Greek faction. To Greeks who dreamed of uniting their warring nation, the Persians represented both a terrible military threat and an unpleasant reminder of Greek willingness to do anything for Persian gold.

So: the Greeks definitely regarded the Persians as a frightening, uncomfortable reality — a proud, self-confident and enormously powerful rival who espouses very different ideals makes a uncomfortable neighbor.

At the same time, there was always a grudging recognition of Persian virtues as well. Persians were generally respected for their bravery, their loyalty, and then their straightforwardness — even in Greek eyes, Greek cleverness was sometimes hard to distinguish from knavery. The Greeks quoted with approval Herodotus’ description of Persian education: “Their sons are carefully instructed from their fifth to their twentieth year, in three things alone---to ride, to draw the bow, and to speak the truth.”

Cyrus, the founder of the Persian Empire, always had a high reputation among Greeks; Xenophon’s highly fictionalized biography, the _[Cyropedia](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/2085/2085-h/2085-h.htm#2H_4_0004)_ __ or “The Education of Cyrus” is a perfect, though not the only example of this regard

> Watch the cattle wending their way wherever their herdsmen guide them, see them grazing in the pastures where they are sent and abstaining from forbidden grounds, the fruit of their own bodies they yield to their master to use as he thinks best; nor have we ever seen one flock among them all combining against their guardian, either to disobey him or to refuse him the absolute control of their produce. On the contrary, they are more apt to show hostility against other animals than against the owner who derives advantage from them. But with man the rule is converse; men unite against none so readily as against those whom they see attempting to rule over them. As long, therefore, as we followed these reflexions, we could not but conclude that man is by nature fitted to govern all creatures, except his fellow-man. But when we came to realise the character of Cyrus the Persian, we were led to a change of mind: here is a man, we said, who won for himself obedience from thousands of his fellows, from cities and tribes innumerable: we must ask ourselves whether the government of men is after all an impossible or even a difficult task, provided one set about it in the right way. Cyrus, we know, found the readiest obedience in his subjects, though some of them dwelt at a distance which it would take days and months to traverse, and among them were men who had never set eyes on him, and for the matter of that could never hope to do so, and yet they were willing to obey him. Cyrus did indeed eclipse all other monarchs, before or since, and I include not only those who have inherited their power, but those who have won empire by their own exertions.

Perhaps the most critical dimension for Greeks looking at the Persians was the question of _luxury._ Luxury was a complicated matter for the Greek psyche: it was a perennial temptation but it also smacked of decadence. The Greeks tended to believe that indulgence in good living was an invitation to weakness; mainland Greeks, for example, usually mocked their Greek cousins in Asia Minor where the climate and the proximity to the trade networks of the Near East made for greater prosperity.

The immense wealth of the Persians was therefore a kind of standing scandal in Greek eyes. If Greek writings about Persia harp on one thing, it’s the enervating effects of luxury: that the manliness and vigor which brought the Persians to the pinnacle of world power are under threat from the soft living which wealth and power provides. Consider the very last passage of Herodotus’ histories, which claims to represent a debate among the Persians that took place when Cyrus first conquered the Medes.

> "Seeing that Zeus grants lordship to the Persian people, and to you, Cyrus, among them, by bringing Astyages low, let us now remove out of the little and rugged land that we possess and take to ourselves one that is better. There be many such on our borders, and many further distant; if we take one of these we shall have more reasons for renown. It is but reasonable that a ruling people should act thus; for when shall we have a fairer occasion than now, when we are lords of so many men and of all Asia?"

> Cyrus heard them, and found nought to marvel at in their design; "Do so," said he; "But if you do, make ready to be no longer rulers, but subjects. Soft lands breed soft men; wondrous fruits of the earth and valiant warriors grow not from the same soil." Thereat the Persians saw that Cyrus reasoned better than they, and they departed from before him, choosing rather to be rulers on a barren mountain side than slaves dwelling in tilled valleys.

The same theme concludes Xenophon’s Cyropedia, though here Xenophon goes on to list all the ways in which the Persians of his own day have degenerated from the noble standards set by Cyrus***:

> But no sooner was [Cyrus] dead than his sons were at strife, cities and nations revolted, and all things began to decay. I can show that what I say is true, and first I will speak of their impiety. In the early days, I am aware, the king and those beneath him never failed to keep the oaths they had sworn and fulfil the promises they had given, even to the worst of criminals. In fact, if such had not been their character and such their reputation, none of the Hellenic generals who marched up with the younger Cyrus could have felt the confidence they did: they would not have trusted a Persian any more than one trusts them to-day, now that their perfidy is known. As it was, they relied on their old reputation and put themselves in their power, and many were taken up to the king and there beheaded.

The interesting question for a modern student of this is whether or not it reflects an actual development within Persian society or whether it is really an expression of Greek ambivalence about wealth. The corrupting influence of luxury was a perennial worry for Greeks, and these examples could just be projecting Greek worries onto the Persians. On the other hand both Herodotus (a Persian subject at birth) and Xenophon (who fought his way through Persia, and had taken service with a Persian army) knew Persians first hand.

Certainly this worry would remain a live issue for several generations of Greeks, after the career of Alexander: the speed with which the rough and ready Macedonians adopted “oriental luxury” was even greater (and, to the Greek moralist, more distressing) than the decay of Cyrus’ austere regime. By the Roman period “Persian luxury” and its debilitating impact was a familiar trope and also a common Roman critique of Greeks in the east, who all seemed rather too soft to the Romans themselves… before, of course, the Romans got their hands on all the money.

Whatever else the Persians were in the Greek imagination, they were _human._ The Greeks had no qualms about stereotypes, so they could see the Persians as sometimes warriors and sometimes weaklings, as stern lawgivers and corrupt grandees, as stiff-necked men of honor and cringing flunkies. They retained, however, recognizable agency that wasn’t hidden behind some all-encompassing theory about racial or ethnic determinism. Herodotus, after all, insists eagerly that the Persians who overthrew the Gaumata the Magian sat down and debated the relative merits of monarchy, democracy, and aristocracy like a bunch of sophists at a tony Athenian dinner party.



* tiny [Plataea](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plataea), [Melos](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siege_of_Melos), [Scione ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scione)and [Torone ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toroni)were not so lucky — but they were also notorious exceptions to the usual rules, still controversial generations later.
**So much for the [popular internet theory that the Persians abolished slavery](https://www.quora.com/Why-didnt-Persians-practice-slavery-through-history/answer/Steve-Theodore?ch=10&share=48ef05bd&srid=zLvM) in their empire
***Xenophon is referring here in particular to the battle of [Cunaxa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Cunaxa), where the Persians treacherously assassinated the entire command staff of the Greek army who had surrendered on promise of safe conduct — an act which left Xenophon himself, as one of the ranking survivors, in effective command on the field. The successful escape of the Greeks from Cunaxa [taught the Greek world that the Persians could be beaten on their own territory.](https://www.quora.com/Why-did-Alexander-the-Great-believe-that-he-could-defeat-the-Persians/answer/Steve-Theodore?ch=10&share=c01ef4bf&srid=zLvM) As he himself put it, “when any man makes war on Persia, whoever he may be, he can roam up and down the country to his heart's content without striking a blow, because they have forgotten the gods and are unjust to their fellow-men. In every way their hearts and minds are lower than in days gone by.”

