# Historians always like to say the ancient world ended by 600 AD but I personally believe the ancient world ended by 1500 AD. However how long would it needs to take for 600 to 2000 AD to be considered ancient?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2022-02-03
	views: 2009
	upvotes: 81
	quora url: /Historians-always-like-to-say-the-ancient-world-ended-by-600-AD-but-I-personally-believe-the-ancient-world-ended-by-1500-AD-However-how-long-would-it-needs-to-take-for-600-to-2000-AD-to-be-considered-ancient/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


You are certainly within your rights to disagee: any historian knows that in the end, __all periodizations are basically bunk__ . They are no more objective and scientific than the division of more recent cultural moments — _Star Wars_  came out in 1977, but for a lot of people it’s the quintessential 80’s movie. Does the Jazz Age start with end of WWI? Women getting the vote? Prohibition? After the growth of radio networks…. One could go on.

Temporal boundaries tend to result from all sorts of irrational and accidental factors that have little to do with the history itself and a lot to do with the institutional evolution of different schools of thought. This is particularly obvious in ancient history, since it is after all a subject with a long pedigree.

If you learned your ancient history in a German university, you were probably offered a class on the _Völkerwanderung,_ the “age of migrations.” From a first statement in the 15th century this idea became central to the German point of view on European history in the 19th as part of Romanticism and German nationalism. There were arguments about the boundaries — do we start before the crossing of the Rhine (406)? before Adrianople (378)? before the Marcommanic wars (166)? — but the idea that some chunk of time formed a unified story was seen as obvious. The heroes of that particular version of the story, naturally, were those brave and vigorous Germanic _Völker_ who tore down the “decadent” Roman empire and created the new Europe. Depending on taste, the _Völkerwanderung_ period might be said to end with the Lombard invasion of Italy (568) or maybe even with Charlemagne (~ 800).

On the other hand if you learned in a French University most of this period is _Le Bas-Empire,_ the “low Empire”_—_ the (supposedly) dismal period of decline that undermined the glory that was Rome. Here we start in the third or fourth century (the civil wars from 235 to 285, or the reign of Diocletian, or the triumph of Constantine) and end either with the collapse of the western Empire (476) or perhaps the Byzantine reconquest of Italy in 554. This periodization reflects the tastes of the French enlightenment: it neatly slices off anything likely to offend the tastes of a _philosophe_  (autocracy, populism, Christianity) leaving the Rome of more congenial emperors like Hadrian untainted by anything insufficiently classical.

Even the importance of that 476 “fall of Rome” itself comes, ultimately, from a conscious effort to de-legitimize several competing claims to Roman inheritance. Italian scholars in the 14th century began to envision a Rome-centric view of their own history, denying Roman legitimacy to medieval institutions stemming from the empire of Charlemagne. It’s no accident that this view emerges during the years when the papacy — the most visible expression of Roman and Italian identity — was in exile in France, under the dubious “protection” of a “Frankish” French king. In mercantile republics like Florence, Roman-ness also inflected political struggles against rural feudal aristocrats who traced their titles to Charlemagne or the Lombards. For a 14th century Italian, conscious of Italy’s growing clout, there was a lot of appeal in cutting those those Frankish and Germanic “Roman” emperors out of the picture. The negative associations of “Gothic” (barbaric, gloomy, enigmatic) come originally from an Italian way of dismissing _French_  architecture.

Thus, 476 and the sorry succession of “Goths” that follow marked a watershed in Italian eyes. But the existence of a thousand years of Roman continuity centered on Constantinople was a bit of an embarrassment for this point of view, particularly given the bad blood between the Catholic and Orthodox churches. Luckily for the Italian point of view, Latin remained the international language of learning in Europe all the way up into the 18th century — saying “Roman” but meaning “Latin” provided a convenient way to usher those pesky Greek Romans off stage. If you pull back the curtain on that little magic act, of course, you can make the case for antiquity going all the way up to 1543. Heck, a few [Ottoman Sultans would urge you to keep on going](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ottoman_claim_to_Roman_succession#:~:text=The%20claim%20of%20the%20Ottoman,Roman%20legitimacy%20reached%20their%20peak.).



All of which is a long way of saying __periodizations are institutionalized narratives.__ The future historians who regard us as unimaginably old and lost in the mists of times will have their own head games to play coming up with the periodization. Will they lump it together as “early anthropocene?” or maybe “before the oceans rose?” or part of “the pre-Islamic era?” There’s no way to tell, though it would be fun to hang around long enough to see how laughable their simplifications of our world will be. One thing is for sure: it’s extremely likely that the way they bundle up our era will fit_a bit too neatly_ with whatever tickles their sense of self-regard or grinds their axes.

