# Did Philo of Alexandria create Jesus Christ?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2021-01-17
	views: 321
	upvotes: 15
	quora url: /Did-Philo-of-Alexandria-create-Jesus-Christ/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


__No__ . This theory could _only_ make sense to somebody who has never actually read Philo.

As far as we know, Philo only visited Judea once.* He was a pillar of the Alexandrian Jewish community, but his life was defined by a classically Jewish tension between assimilation and cultural independence. In his day, Alexandria’s Jews had been part — though often a stigmatized and excluded part — of the city for almost three centuries. As a young man he received a thorough Greek education. His Greek is fluent, if very academic (in marked contrast to the clunky writing of his younger contemporary Josephus). On the other hand, his grasp of Hebrew was limited enough that generations of scholars have been unable to agree on whether he ever actually read the Torah in the original language at all. Above all, his connection to the religious and political situation in Judea — the Herodian dynasty, the Roman occupation, and the conflict between the [pharisees ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pharisees)and [sadducees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sadducees) — was arm’s length at best. But these tensions are visible everywhere in the story of Jesus.

Ultimately, Philo’s family was far closer to Rome than Jerusalem. Philo’s nephew [Tiberius Julius Alexander](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiberius_Julius_Alexander) ended up leading a Roman pogrom against Alexandria’s Jews which left 50,000 dead. Later Alexander he was chief of staff for the Roman army which destroyed Jerusalem. Philo may have been an outsider, but he was a privileged one, as his expensive Greek education and his occasional presence at the Roman imperial court show quite clearly.

Philo’s entire career was devoted to idea that the Jewish tradition, properly understood, was in harmony with the Greek philosophy of his own day. Fundamentally, he is an example of the colonized intellectual, who want simultaneously to prove the worth of his own people and their distinctive outlook and at the same time to show that their way of life actually reflects rather than contests the values of the dominant culture. He never misses an opportunity to show his appreciation for and mastery of Greek culture.

If Philo had decided to invent a religion, it would never have centered on a working class Jew from Galilee. His savior would have been an educated aristocrat with a mastery of Greek philosophy and a taste for the classics. Had he invented Jesus, the crucifixion would have culminated with some elegant allusion to the last words of Socrates, not a quote from the Psalms in Aramaic.** But, of course, crucifixion — a penalty reserved for the lower classes and for slaves — would _never_ have figured in Philo’s version of events.

Philo’s life’s mission was to establish the respectability of his community in the eyes of a hostile and suspicious majority. For him to invent a religion which might almost have been custom-built to shock Greek sensibilities is _extremely_ far-fetched. Moreover, he’s a long-winded, pedantic author who would never be caught dead writing in the simple style of the Gospel — and, as a somewhat fussy intellectual, he would never have imagined a messianic baby in a manger or the savior of mankind being executed as a criminal.

Just ask yourself, what kind of religion would this author invent?

> It is not without a particular and correct meaning that Joseph is said to have had a coat of many colours. For a political constitution is a many-coloured and multiform thing, admitting of an infinite variety of changes in its general appearance, in its affairs, in its moving causes, in the peculiar laws respecting strangers, in numberless differences respecting times and places. For as the master of a ship collects together all the means which may tend to ensure him a favourable voyage with reference to and in dependency on the changes of the wind, not always guiding his vessel in one and the same way; and as a physician does not apply one and the same means of cure to every sick person, nor even to one person if his disease varies in its character, but watches the periods of its abatement, and of its intensity, and of its becoming full or empty, and the alterations of the causes of the sickness, and so varies his remedies as much as possible to secure the safety of his patient, applying one remedy at one time and another at another; in the same manner I conceive that the man immersed in political affairs is of necessity a multiform man, assuming many different appearances, one in time of peace and another in time of war; and a different character according as those who are opposed to him are numerous or few in number, withstanding a small number with vigorous resolution, but using persuasion and gentle means towards a large body. And in some cases where there is much danger, still for the sake of the common advantage he will take the place of every one, and manage the business in hand by himself; in other cases, where it is merely a question of labour he will let others minister to him as his assistants. It was appropriately said that the man was sold. For the haranguer of the people and the demagogue, mounting the tribunal, like slaves who are being sold and exposed to view, is a slave instead of a free man, by reason of the honours which he seems to be receiving, being led away by ten thousand masters? The same person is also represented as having been torn by wild beasts; and vainglory, which lies in wait for a man, is an untameable wild beast, tearing and destroying all who give into it. And they who have been purchasers are likewise sellers; for there is one master only to the citizens who live in any city; but there is a multitude of masters, one succeeding another in a certain succession and regular order. But those who have been sold three times change their masters like bad slaves, not remaining with their original ones, by reason of the speedily satisfied irregularity of their dispositions, always thirsting after novelty.

If you made it this far, tell me you recognize that as [a commentary on the story of Joseph and the Coat of Many Colors](http://www.earlychristianwritings.com/yonge/book23.html). That’s classic Philo: wordy, discursive, not particularly imaginative and obsessively concerned with sounding like an Athenian gentleman.*** If he’d invented himself a savior, it would have been a logic-chopping, Homer-quoting Jew from a rich family who would be the life of a faculty dinner party— not the son of a carpenter or a wandering preacher depending on the kindness of his working-class friends, executed for treason by the Roman state.

__TLDR__ L: __No, no, a thousand times no.__ 

—-

* in [De Providentia 64,](http://www.earlyjewishwritings.com/text/philo/book39.html) he mentions passing through Ascalon when on his way to visit the temple at Jerusalem
** There’s no evidence that Philo knew Aramaic.
*** For the record, Philo’s commentary on the story of Joseph comes in at almost twice the word count of Mark’s gospel. The English translation of his commentary on the ten commandments is about 15,000 words — 150 times longer, more or less, than the actual commandments themselves.

