# During the Hellenistic Greece and the Roman Empire periods, what were the highest social status professions or careers for non-governmental, non-military individuals?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2021-05-09
	views: 639
	upvotes: 21
	quora url: /During-the-Hellenistic-Greece-and-the-Roman-Empire-periods-what-were-the-highest-social-status-professions-or-careers-for-non-governmental-non-military-individuals/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


To a real degree, having any profession marked you off as _not_  high status: in theory, the only truly respectable social position was that of the landed aristocrat who didn’t have to work for a living and devoted himself — it was, of course, expected to be a _him —_  to politics and warfare in varying degrees. To be a truly private, apolitical individual in Greece or Rome was at best regarded as eccentric, at worst it was a kind of dereliction of duty. That does not mean nobody pursued an entirely private life — but doing so was inherently a step down from the proper, public role of an aristocrat.

“Politics” here does not necessarily mean _electoral_ politics; you could for example be a minor magistrate, overseeing a local market or an annual festival; you could be a judge, presiding over court cases or even a priest, since priesthoods were mostly concerned with managing the practicalities of caring for temple buildings and provisioning the various civic rituals.

All of these were respectable, “public” activities for the gentry class which didn’t automatically require a lot of ambition or zeal. The law and the priesthood could be pursued with varying degrees of seriousness and dedication. You might, for example, appear in court to represent people who were allied with your family or clan, lending them the prestige of your family name and hopefully the eloquence of your well-trained oratory. Effectively, every Greek or Roman aristocrat trained to be a lawyer: the skills of argument and declamation were the foundation of classical educational theory and practice. Naturally, of course, not every well-off young man was actually very good at this, so it was quite common for talented speakers like [Cicero ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cicero)to make a visible and essentially professional career as advocates, assisted by a more bookish legal specialists who didn’t necessarily excel at speechifying but who could help with the legal technicalities. Even here, doing legal work “for money” was regarded as undignified — but doing it well was valuable and could be an important tool in the network of favor-trading and influence which dictated the social pecking order of the upper classes.

To a lesser degree, an interest in medicine was also seen as fairly respectable — but, not unlike the practice of the law, it was not something to be undertaken for profit. A wealthy landowner might offer medical advise to his neighbors or tenants, but a real gentleman would not earn a living as a practicing physician. In the Greek-speaking world medicine was seen as closely related to philosophy and therefore slightly less of a tradesman’s job: an educated Greek gentleman like [Galen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galen) could work as a physician without endangering his social status because of the subject matter. However too obvious an interest in fee-for-service medicine marked you off as a member of the commercial classes.

Technically-oriented magistracies were also respectable, although for the most part the technical aspects were delegated to real professionals — that is, to slaves or freedmen. A good example is the career of the famous engineer and architect [Vitruvius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitruvius#Life_and_career), who learned the technical aspects of his trade in the military but was able to carry them forward onto civilian life without attracting criticism for being a grubby artisan.

All of this takes place against a backdrop of fairly well understood hypocrisies. It was, in theory, illegal for the upper reaches of the aristocracy to engage in trade — shipping and banking were supposedly undignified pursuits for gentlemen. Nonetheless, wealthy people found ways to invest in these enterprises and reap the rewards: for example, a group of aristocrats could start a “business” by buying part-ownership on a slave, who would then run the business and kick back the profits — this was about as close as antiquity got to a share-based legal corporation. A good example of an aristocrat who was a big-business tycoon in all but name is the notorious [Crassus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Licinius_Crassus), the wealthiest man in the Roman republic. He acquired a lot of this wealth through his political alliances (he profited enormously from the proscriptions of Sulla) but he also “owned” — via a slave intermediary — a kind of private fire brigade. The story (as retailed by Plutarch) gives a good flavor for the social attitudes around his wealth:

> People were wont to say that the many virtues of Crassus were darkened by the one vice of avarice, and indeed he seemed to have no other but that; for it being the most predominant, obscured others to which he was inclined. The arguments in proof of his avarice were the vastness of his estate, and the manner of raising it; for whereas at first he was not worth above three hundred talents, yet, though in the course of his political life he dedicated the tenth of all he had to Hercules, and feasted the people, and gave to every citizen corn enough to serve him three months, upon casting up his accounts, before he went upon his Parthian expedition, he found his possessions to amount to seven thousand one hundred talents; most of which, if we may scandal him with a truth, he got by fire and rapine, making his advantages of the public calamities. For when Sylla seized the city, and exposed to sale the goods of those that he had caused to be slain, accounting them booty and spoils, and, indeed, calling them so too, and was desirous of making as many, and as eminent men as he could, partakers in the crime, Crassus never was the man that refused to accept, or give money for them. Moreover, observing how extremely subject the city was to fire and falling down of houses, by reason of their height and their standing so near together, he bought slaves that were builders and architects, and when he had collected these to the number of more than five hundred, he made it his practice to buy houses that were on fire, and those in the neighbourhood, which, in the immediate danger and uncertainty the proprietors were willing to part with for little or nothing, so that the greatest part of Rome, at one time or other, came into his hands.

> Yet for all he had so many workmen, he never built anything but his own house, and used to say that those that were addicted to building would undo themselves soon enough without the help of other enemies. And though he had many silver mines, and much valuable land, and labourers to work in it, yet all this was nothing in comparison of his slaves, such a number and variety did he possess of excellent readers, amanuenses, silversmiths, stewards and table-waiters, whose instruction he always attended to himself, superintending in persons, while they learned, and teaching them himself, accounting it the main duty of a master to look over the servants that are, indeed, the living tools of housekeeping; and in this, indeed, he was in the right, in thinking, that is, as he used to say, that servants ought to look after all other things, and the master after them. For economy, which in things inanimate is but money-making, when exercised over men becomes policy.

It’s worth pointing out that even this most business-like of Roman aristocrats craved the respectability that came from political and military glory. He spent much of his vast wealth on loans and gifts to other aristocrats (he bankrolled a good deal of Julius Caesar’s early career, for example), converting physical capital into political capital. He died, infamously, pursuing an unnecessary war with Parthia because he was jealous of Caesar and Pompey’s military reputations.

