# How would you guys write an essay about interpretation and allegory in Ancient Greek? Can somebody help me with some information and tips?

	author: Steve Theodore
	written: 2021-01-10
	views: 320
	upvotes: 9
	quora url: /How-would-you-guys-write-an-essay-about-interpretation-and-allegory-in-Ancient-Greek-Can-somebody-help-me-with-some-information-and-tips/answer/Steve-Theodore
	author url: /profile/Steve-Theodore


There’s a couple of obvious ways to approach this.

A __historical__  approach would be to focus on how Greek writers themselves used allegorical interpretations of mythological subject matter. This was quite a common approach during the Hellenistic period, when the less plausible or socially redeeming aspects of traditional stories had been debated for a long time (a good example is [book 2 of the Republic](http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/republic.3.ii.html), where Socrates says things like

> The narrative of Hephaestus binding Here his mother, or how on another occasion Zeus sent him flying for taking her part when she was being beaten, and all the battles of the gods in Homer --these tales must not be admitted into our State, whether they are supposed to have an allegorical meaning or not. For a young person cannot judge what is allegorical and what is literal; anything that he receives into his mind at that age is likely to become indelible and unalterable; and therefore it is most important that the tales which the young first hear should be models of virtuous thoughts.

(Republic 2.378 c-d)

You’ll notice that already by this time — this was probably written 375 BC, though the discussion supposedly took place a generation earlier — Greeks were already familiar with the idea of re-interpreting the traditional tales in ways intended to get at their “true” meanings distinct from their magical or folkloric content. Plato’s word here is actually _hyponoia, “the knowledge underneath”_ rather than _allegoria_ , which is more or less “saying something else) but he expects his audience to know that most of the stories being told to children are assumed to have a deeper meaning beyond their fantastic surfaces. More on Plato’s use and critique of myths [here](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/plato-myths/).

The disconnect between the goings on in mythological tales and the demands of contemporary morality or the everyday life was quite obvious to the Greeks themselves, between Plato’s day and the later Roman era a lot of effort was devoted to finding the hidden truths which were supposedly lurking beneath the surface of traditional tales. For example Stoic philosophers saw much of the familiar material in the Iliad and the Odyssey as a coded explanation of their own view of the of the universe, while Neo-Platonists The Roman author Cicero provides an example of the same view in Latin, while the Jewish writer Philo applies the same technique to the Hebrew Bible. [This review of Luc Brisson’s “How Philosophers saved myths” ](https://bmcr.brynmawr.edu/2005/2005.10.43/)is a quick overview of the ideas and would be a good jumping off point for future research. [This page ](http://people.hws.edu/gfrost-arnold/lecture_3.htm)is a bit cryptic (it’s course notes, apparently) but should also get you some good google terms to work with). [This one](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/~jfarrell/courses/myth/topics/allegory.html) is a decent introduction as well. There’s a great, if slightly old fashioned, introduction to history of literary allegory in C.S. Lewis’s [The Discarded Image.](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08MCLCBTR/ref=dp-kindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8&btkr=1) It also includes a goodly set of examples though he’s usually working from Latin rather than Greek sources. A good example of allegorical reading in action is “[On the cave of the nymphs](http://www.tertullian.org/fathers/porphyry_cave_of_nymphs_02_translation.htm)” by the Neo-Platonic philosopher Porphyry.

So — one possible way to approach a paper would be to find and discuss ancient or later allegorical readings of a particular myth to show how the allegorical technique could re-interpret a text to mean something quite different from the surface meaning of the text. \

An alternative approach would be to __do your own allegorical interpretation__ . This is more common than people realize: quite often when a modern critic reads an ancient text through the lens of their own preoccupations they are — consciously or not — following in the footsteps of the ancients who did the same thing. When [Freud re-interprets the story of Oedipus as an exploration of repressed sexuality](https://www.thoughtco.com/oedipus-complex-4582398), or a f[eminist reads of the story of Medea as a form of revolutionary empowerment](https://www.jstor.org/stable/24595328?seq=1), or a [Marxist interprets the Orestaia as a manifestation of class struggle](http://www.bravenewclassics.info/index.php/george-thomson-side-b/) they are all in sharing in the basic gambit that started in the sixth century BC: the belief that there is another vital story hidden in the pages of what look like fairy tales or adventure stories.

As a paper writing strategy, you could pick a particular myth which had an allegorical interpretation either in antiquity or later and essentially write your own. The act of doing allegorical interpretation is actually surprisingly simple — if you spend a couple of hours bouncing around Quora you’ll stumble across many people doing what are, essentially, allegorical interpretations of Star Wars or the Marvel Extended Universe or whatever.

The interesting bit in the approach would be to show two things: on the one hand, that your allegorical reading is has enough detail to make it interesting, and on the other that you have thought through what it means to read a text in terms that the original author almost certainly not part of the author’s conscious intentions. Literary critics of all stripes have debated the meaning and validity of doing that for the past two and a half millennia so it’s not like you’ll just solve it or be able to google it up — but showing that you have worked through the questions on your own and have a solid understanding of what you’re trying to achieve can make for a solid paper.

If you choose this route, I’d recommend reading this slightly grumpy but useful article before setting out: [That Thing You Think Is an Allegory Isn’t an Allegory!](https://slate.com/culture/2016/05/an-allegory-is-not-the-same-as-a-metaphor-in-praise-of-the-medieval-literary-tradition.html)

